ID	Title	Abstract
1	Comparative analysis of growth and yield parameters of grape var. 'Muscat Hamburg' grafted on 'Dog Ridge' rootstock and self-rooted cuttings	India ranks seventh in grape production at the global level. Tamil Nadu is one of the leading states in grape cultivation in India. The utilization of rootstock has become a priority aspect in grapes cultivation worldwide, especially in the current climatic conditions. The utilization of grape root stocks has not been completely explored yet in Tamil Nadu. In this regard, we compared the growth and yield parameters of grape (Vitis vinifera) var. ''Muscat Hamburg'' grafted on 'Dog Ridge' (Vitis champini) and self-rooted cuttings(of ''Muscat Hamburg'') under Cumbum valley condition, Theni district, Tamil Nadu, India. Randomly, fifty vines were chosen, each in grafted and self-rooted cutting category. 'Muscat Hamburg' is a wide variety in Cumbum valley of Theni district. The growth and yield characters were recorded. The petiole nutrient content for major elements during the flowering phase was analyzed. The growth characters viz., trunk diameter (42.46 mm), cane diameter (5.70 mm), number of fruitful shoots per cane (1.37), shoot length after pruning (42.52 cm), and leaf area (108.16 cm<sup>2</sup>) were recorded maximum in 'Muscat Hamburg' grafted on 'Dog Ridge' rootstock. The grafted 'Muscat Hamburg'on 'Dog Ridge' showed the highest berry weight (3.67 g), and the number of clusters per shoot (1.46). The yield characters, viz., the fruitfulness characters, such as the number of fruitful shoots per cane (1.37) was recorded better in 'Muscat Hamburg' grafted on 'Dog Ridge' rootstock. The total number of berries per bunch (87.00), and yield per vine (21.87 kg/vine) were recorded as the highest in grafted vines. Obviously, when berry weight was the highest in grafted type, it reflected in bunch weight (276.74 g) with a maximum amount than self-rooted. The petiole nutrient contents were also found to be higher in grafted ones than in self-rooted cuttings. Overall, the use of 'Dog Ridge' as rootstock for grape variety 'Muscat Hamburg' was found promising to set enhanced vegetative growth, berry characters, and yield of the bunch than self-rooted cutting.
2	Feasibility of using a silicon preparation to promote growth of forest seedlings: application to pine (Pinus sylvestris) and oak (Quercus robur)	The present study was inspired by scientific reports describing the positive effects of silicon preparations on fruit and vegetables in horticulture. The use of silicon preparations in forest protection represents a new research application, especially in the cases of oak seedlings that are damaged by oak powdery mildew. Additionally, these preparations increase the photosynthetic efficiency of the seedlings, and thus promote increased biomass and better nutritional value of the root systems. The new idea of using silicon formulations in forestry, based on the initial test results, is particularly important for seedlings in the post-planting period in forest plantations. In particular, these preparations increase yield and plant growth, and improve plant health. So far, no comparable studies have been conducted on forest tree species. To this end, one year-old pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) and two year-old English oak (Quercus robur L.) seedlings were sprayed with silicon preparations of different concentrations, and changes in growth parameters and photosynthetic efficiency were observed. The main objective of the study was to determine the effect of the silicon preparation on the seedlings during their first life span, i.e., the first year after planting. In this study, 50 pine and 50 oak seedlings were sprayed three times with the silicon preparation, in five variants (control; concentrations of 1%, 2%, 3% and 5%), as well as the chlorophyll fluorescence, height, thickness and biomass of the roots, were measured. It was found that the treatment with a concentration of 2% was better and statistically, significantly different from the other variants, e.g., in terms of increasing photosynthetic efficiency.
3	Short-term growth response of young pine (Pinus silvestris) seedlings to the different types of soil media mixture with phosphogypsum formulations under Poland forest environmental conditions	"The production of phosphoric acid produces ""waste heaps"" that have not yet been tapped, but which have the character of weak fertilizers and can perhaps be reintroduced into the elemental cycle in the forests. Two variants of mixing with organic ash and with sewage sludge were carried out. One-year-old pine seedlings (Pinus sylvestris L.) from the Trzebiez forest district (northern Poland) were planted in pots with soil that also came from the same field. Preparations containing phosphogypsum were applied topically to the soil in four doses (1, 2, 3 and 5 t/ha). The trial, which lasted one growing season, was conducted in four replicates. At the end of the trial, the height of the above-ground parts and root length, needle and root area, root neck diameter and photosynthetic performance were measured. The phosphogypsum-based preparations used showed no harmful (toxic) effects on the potted pine seedlings during the six-month trial period. The loosely prepared preparation made from a mixture of phosphogypsum and organic ash began to have a positive effect on the development of the seedlings' root system, and it was also easier to mix with the soil surface than phosphogypsum with sewage sludge, which also contained a sticky form. The photosynthetic performance of one-year-old pine seedlings decreased after one growing season following the application of phosphogypsum preparations and most of the growth parameters tested did not differ from the control, so observations over a longer period (at least two to three growing seasons) are required. However, dosages of 1 and 2 t/ha seem to be the most promising, and these lower dosages are more economical to manage in nurseries or plantations, especially on poor sites. Formulations should be tested for heavy metals and their effects on seedling development. Testing should also be continued to monitor changes in the microbiome."
4	Effect of the varying inclusion levels of the egg yolk powder on growth, stress tolerance, and pigmentation of Guppy (Poecilia reticulata)	The newly hatched nauplii of Artemia is extensively used as a live feed for ornamental fish hatchlings; however, its high cost and unbalanced nutrients necessitate exploring sustainable alternatives. An experiment was conducted to evaluate the effects of four formulated diets of 0%,5%, 10%, and 20% inclusion levels of egg yolk powder and other ingredients (fish meal, soybean meal, rice polish, corn) during the nursery stage of Guppy (Poecilia reticulata) compared to Artemia salina as a control. Results showed that survival did not differ (P > 0.05) among the diets. Weight gain, daily weight gain, and specific growth rate of the fry fed with 10% egg yolk-included diet containing 49.6% fish meal and 18.8% soybean meal were significantly higher (P < 0.05) than those of the other test diets and the A. salina. All the diets showed higher stress indexes (P < 0.05) than the control; the test diets did not affect pigmentation.
5	Rapid faunal colonization and recovery of biodiversity and functional diversity following eelgrass restoration	Seagrass meadows and their associated biodiverse assemblages have declined globally due to environmental and anthropogenic stressors. Restoration of these critical habitats has the potential to reverse coastal biodiversity loss. Here, we tested the role of patch size (which can affect recruitment, food availability, and/or predation) in driving faunal colonization in an eelgrass (Zostera marina) restoration trial in Sweden. Eelgrass shoots were transplanted in plots with different configurations (continuous vs. checkerboard patterns with three patch sizes), and we followed invertebrate colonization (biodiversity and functional diversity) during the first two growing seasons. We found rapid faunal colonization following the transplantation of eelgrass shoots in all plots with invertebrate densities reaching 50-80% of the reference meadow after only one growing season (3 months). After two growing seasons (15 months), the faunal density, biodiversity, and functional diversity were similar to the reference meadow, despite eelgrass density and biomass still being lower than the reference meadow. Biodiversity, functional diversity, and community structure were similar among the different planted plots, that is, there was no indication that patch size influenced faunal colonization. We therefore consider that smaller patches embedded within larger restoration plots can be as effective for promoting biodiversity as continuous patches, with reduced costs and fewer shoots required. We also noted high natural variability between years both in the reference meadow and planted plots, showing the dynamic nature of seagrass ecosystems, and the importance of a well-planned monitoring scheme that considers the reference area and restored area within the same temporal scale.
6	Regeneration of Pinus sibirica Du Tour as a result of trophic relationships with the thin-billed nutcracker (Nucifraga caryocatactes macrorhynchos Brehm C L)	Identifying the patterns of dynamics of natural populations of woody plants at the stage of their renewal is one of the main problems of forest ecology. The reforestation process is determined by both the dynamics of seed production and the specificity of seed dispersal of forest tree species. The five-needled pine renewal the Cembrae subsection with wingless seeds depends on birds of the genus Nucifraga sp., which store and spread their seeds. The aim of this study is to determine the relationship between seed production and regeneration of Pinus sibirica Du Tour using the thin-billed nutcracker (Nucifraga caryocatactes macrorhynchos Brehm C. L.) as a mediator. Long-term studies of these relationships have been carried out in the Siberian pine forests of the North Ural Mountains. As a result, a paradoxical conclusion is made that the number of Nucifraga birds during the period of storing and spreading of seeds in the previous year is a key factor in the abundance of Pinus sibirica seedlings. In turn, the number of seeds, both from the previous year and the current year, affects the number of Nucifraga birds.
7	Seasonal variation in cell wall composition and carbohydrate metabolism in the seagrass Posidonia oceanica growing at different depths	Posidonia oceanica is a common seagrass in the Mediterranean Sea that is able to sequester large amounts of carbon. The carbon assimilated during photosynthesis can be partitioned into non-structural sugars and cell-wall polymers. In this study, we investigated the distribution of carbon in starch, soluble carbohydrates and cell-wall polymers in leaves and rhizomes of P. oceanica. Analyses were performed during summer and winter in meadows located south of the Frioul archipelago near Marseille, France. The leaves and rhizomes were isolated from plants collected in shallow (2 m) and deep water (26 m). Our results showed that P. oceanica stores more carbon as starch, sucrose and cellulose in summer and that this is more pronounced in rhizomes from deep-water plants. In winter, the reduction in photoassimilates was correlated with a lower cellulose content, compensated with a greater lignin content, except in rhizomes from deep-water plants. The syringyl-to-guaiacyl (S/G) ratio in the lignin was higher in leaves than in rhizomes and decreased in rhizomes in winter, indicating a change in the distribution or structure of the lignin. These combined data show that deep-water plants store more carbon during summer, while in winter the shallow- and deep-water plants displayed a different cell wall composition reflecting their environment.
8	Effect of composition and properties of soils and soil-sand substrates contaminated with copper on morphometric parameters of barley plants	In a multifactor vegetation experiment, the effect of composition and properties of soils and soil-sand substrates contaminated with various doses of copper acetate on the morphometric parameters of spring barley seedlings was studied. It has been shown that germination and seed germination energy, as well as the length of roots, aboveground parts, and dry biomass of plants depend in a complex way on the concentration of Cu in soils and substrates, as well as on their buffering capacity to heavy metals. Two mechanisms of Cu influence on plant development have been revealed, i.e., metabolic at C<sub>Cu</sub> 500 mg/kg of soil and diffusional at C<sub>Cu</sub> 500 mg/kg. Using the methods of regression analysis of experimental data, a multiple regression equation has been obtained that combines the morphometric index of plants, the concentration of Cu in substrates, and the buffering capacity of soils to Cu. On its basis, in the soil buffering capacity-Cu concentration coordinates, a curve of values of the maximum permissible concentrations of Cu in soils was built on a plane in the range from 17 to 2047 mg/kg. It permits us to separate the zone of permissible development of barley plants (a decrease of the morphometric index by 15%) from the zone of exceeding the accepted values of the maximum permissible concentration of Cu. Thus, the maximum permissible concentration is considered to be a function of Cu concentration, the soil buffering capacity to heavy metals, and plant species rather than a fixed value.
9	Effects of hazelnut husk waste on quality parameters of German primrose (Primula obconica Hance)	The study was conducted to determine the feasibility of using hazelnut shell waste as a growth medium for German primroses (Primula obconica Hance) under greenhouse conditions. Five different media combinations were prepared using sphagnum moss peat (SMP) and hazelnut husk waste (HHW). Some quality and growth parameters of P. obconica appeared to be significantly different depending on the growth medium. Results showed that HHW had a statistically significant impact on two parameters, namely aesthetic appearance score and mean flower weight, but had no impact on the other qualitative traits. The highest (8.94) and lowest (4.70) esthetic appearance scores were observed at 100% HHW and control treatments, respectively. In addition, the maximum (0.15 g) and minimum (0.097 g) mean flower weights were observed in HHW2 treatment and control plants, respectively.
10	Effect of soil mixtures based on a gneiss-derived soil and two forest floor types on growth and nutritional status of Castanea sativa Mill. seedlings	Aiming at the production of robust chestnut plants suitable for the establishment of plantations or for their use in afforestation of forest ecosystems, we studied the effect of soil mixtures on growth, physiological characteristics, and nutritional status of chestnut seedlings. In a complete randomized-block design pot experiment, the soil used was derived from gneiss weathering (GN) and the treatments included GN and GN with fertilization (GN-FER) as well as mixtures of GN with forest floor (FF) from chestnuts (GN-CFF) and from evergreen broad-leaved trees (GN-EFF). Both types of forest floor and fertilization had similar positive effect on seedlings growth and photosynthetic parameters. The most significant effects on soil nutrients were found in GN-CFF and GN-EFF treatments, except for extractable phosphorus (P) and exchangeable potassium (K), whose highest concentrations were observed in GN-FER. Leaf analysis showed that the concentrations of almost all nutrients in all treatments were within the adequacy limits, with the exception of nitrogen (N) in GN, copper (Cu) in GN-EFF, and K in all treatments. Both types of forest floor satisfied the nutritional needs of chestnut seedlings to a large extent and their incorporation in this type of soil combined with limited addition mainly of K and to a lesser degree of P could enhance adequacy of these nutrients in soil and plants. Thus, forest floor application may be an appropriate alternative to integrated nutrient management for robust chestnut seedlings production with significant forestry and environmental impacts.
11	Cattle dung and bioturbation by dung beetles improve oak seedling establishment in Mediterranean silvopastoral ecosystems	"This study aims to determine whether the application of cattle manure and associated bioturbation by dung beetles and other invertebrates can increase oak seedling establishment in the high biodiversity Mediterranean silvopastoral systems known as ""dehesas"", which are comprised of scattered oaks and a grassland layer and are used for livestock rearing. A two-year study was conducted in a representative dehesa in southern Spain. Firstly, the effect of cattle dung pads on acorn consumption by livestock and wild predators was monitored, along with dung beetle abundance and plot bioturbation. Secondly, the indirect effects of bioturbation on acorn burial, acorn predation by rodents and oak seedling establishment were assessed under the condition of livestock exclusion. The results consistently demonstrate a high positive indirect effect of the presence of cattle manure on the persistence of acorns, as well as on seedling establishment, as a result of reduced predation by rodents and improved microhabitat conditions for the acorns and seedlings. These processes were mediated by bioturbation. Tunneler dung beetles, which move a great amount of soil material, were dominant in our records, which suggest their importance for passive acorn burial, without disregarding the influence of other edaphic invertebrates present. We conclude that the presence of cattle manure significantly improves oak seedling establishment in Mediterranean dehesas through the passive burial of acorns by bioturbation, which acts to protect them from predation by rodents, desiccation and other damage. Passive acorn burial by dung beetles and other invertebrates thus emerges as an important ecosystem service that has been little-studied to date. Appropriate rotational management of livestock could therefore contribute to addressing the bottleneck of oak regeneration in Mediterranean dehesas."
12	Integrated application of selected elements of sustainability, circular economy, bioeconomy, and environmental management system in guesthouses	Efforts to minimize negative effects on the environment are manifested in the hospitality sector in the form of integrated application of elements of sustainable business, circular economy, bioeconomy, and environmental management. Those who run accommodation facilities are becoming environmentally aware and feel that they should be more involved in sustainable practices and thus contribute to improving the environment both locally and nationally. The main goal of this study is to identify and evaluate the application of selected elements and measures of sustainable business, circular economy, bioeconomy, and environmental management in guesthouses of the Czech Republic. A questionnaire survey (n1 = 343) was carried out together with a qualitative focus group method (n2 = 5); the data evaluation was carried out using advanced statistical methods (Tukey HSD test, Kruskal-Wallis test, correspondence analysis). The results showed that a higher classification in the guesthouse is associated with an increasing trend in the number of environmentally friendly operating methods used. Measures related to waste sorting containers (74%) and energy-saving and LED light bulbs (68%) showed the highest values. The results are useful for the practice of national professional associations that support the careful handling of resources and thereby influence the entire hospitality sector.
13	The quality of grape and wine of Merlot and Blatina varieties in the agroecological conditions of the Trebinje vineyard	The aim of this paper is to present the quality of grape and wine of Merlot and Blatina varieties in the agro ecological conditions of the Trebinje vineyard, during the vintages of 2016 and 2017. The vineyards were established in 2004 (Merlot) and in 2013 (Blatina), at an altitude of 269 m, with the planting distance of 2.8 x 1 m for Blatina and 2.8 x 0.9 m for Merlot. The Merlot and Blatina grape varieties were grafted on Berlandieri x Riparia Kober 5BB rootstock. The research included analysis of the sugar, total acid content and pH as parameters of grape quality. The following parameters of wine quality were analyzed: alcohol content, total acid, total ash, content of extract and total phenols. The quality of the grapes, grown in the conditions of Trebinje vineyard is suitable to produce quality red wines.
14	Bumblebees sense rootstock-mediated nutrition and fertilization regime in tomato. (Special Issue: Beneficial elements in plants: developing resilience under stressful environments.)	Aims: Since producing more with less is required for increasing agricultural sustainability and reducing its environmental impact, breeding varieties with increased yield stability under reduced fertilizer application is an important goal, particularly in high valued horticultural crops such as tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.). However, because of the difficulties to conciliate yield and fertilizer use efficiency through breeding, the graft-compatible genetic biodiversity existing in horticultural species offers the possibility to directly approach this objective in high-yielding elite varieties through improving nutrient capture and promoting ecosystem services such as insect pollination. We hypothesized that rootstocks affect pollinator foraging decisions through the nutritional status that impacts yield.
15	Green compost amendment improves potato plant performance on Mars regolith simulant as substrate for cultivation in space. (Special Issue: Beneficial elements in plants: developing resilience under stressful environments.)	Background and aims: Higher plants represent an optimal tool to regenerate resources while producing food in Space. However, the configuration of fertile cultivation substrates based on extraterrestrial resources is still a challenge. We evaluated the adaptability of potato (Solanum tuberosum L., cv. 'Colomba') to the growth on six substrates: the MMS-1 Mars regolith simulant, alone (R100) and in mixture with 30% in vol. of green compost (R70C30), a fluvial sand, alone or mixed with 30% of compost (S100 and S70C30), a red soil from Sicily (RS), and a volcanic soil from Campania (VS).
16	Litter leachate as a potential selector of woody species germination at alpine treeline	The advancement of upper forest limits is driven by environmental conditions, but our current understanding overlooks the attributes of habitats and germination ability of woody species. Habitats, through plant litter, impact the competitive relation of germination and seedling growth. The aims of this study were to identify the selective effect of six litter leachates on the germination of indigenous Norway spruce (Picea abies) and nonindigenous dwarf pine (Pinus mugo) and compare the germination rates of the species. We collected plant litter and seeds from the (sub)alpine belt of the Hruby Jesenik Mts. (the Eastern Sudetes Mts.; the Czech Republic). We evaluated the effect of plant litter leachates from alpine heathlands, wind-swept alpine grasslands, subalpine tall-herb plants, Pinus mugo scrub, subalpine Vaccinium vegetation, and Norway spruce clonal groups on germination process under standard light and temperature conditions. The germination of Norway spruce was inhibited by the litter leachate from subalpine tall-herb vegetation mainly dominated by Calamagrostis villosa, whereas that of dwarf pine was not. The other five litter leachates had no significant effect on the both. Under standard conditions, the germination time of dwarf pine is on average one day faster. These results suggest that most of the litter leachates examined may have small impacts on the germinability and germination time of Norway spruce and dwarf pine, but litter from the subalpine tall-herb vegetation can act as a filter that influences the seedling composition of the woody species.
17	Perfect poopers; passerine birds facilitate sexual reproduction in clonal keystone plants of the boreal forest through directed endozoochory towards dead wood	Berry-producing Vaccinium shrubs are keystone species in boreal forest ecosystems and their berries provide an essential food source for many vertebrates. In Fennoscandia, both the abundance and cover of Vaccinium have decreased in forests, with intensive forestry practice as a main driver. Vaccinium seedling recruitment is constricted to recruitment windows of opportunity and appears to be infrequent, mainly due to seed dispersal limitation. Passerine birds are key players in seed dispersal, which can be directed towards perching points such as coarse woody debris.In this study, we investigated the potential for directed endozoochory by passerine birds towards cut stumps and if such stumps were viable recruitment windows for Vaccinium species, in an intensively managed boreal forest landscape of central Norway. We surveyed stump and paired forest floor microsites for passerine scat (i.e. potential seed rain) and Vaccinium seedlings. We collected passerine scat and conducted germination experiments to assess if they contained viable seed. We tested the microsite effect (i.e. forest floor/stump) on scat deposition and seedling establishment and then used modified ensemble classifiers to identify important environmental factors affecting scat deposition and seedling establishment patterns.We found that passerine scat was disproportionally deposited on stumps, and that the vast majority of scat contained viable Vaccinium seed. Stumps were also suitable recruitment windows for Vaccinium species, as a higher probability of seedling establishment occurred at stumps compared with the forest floor. However, scat deposition and seedling establishment at stumps were rather contextual and determined by environmental variables. The probability of scat deposition increased with higher complexity of the vertical forest structure and lower canopy cover, whereas seedling establishment required bryophyte cover and larger stumps, or alternatively smaller stumps with competition-free spaces. Our results highlight a pathway to successful sexual reproduction for Vaccinium species in managed forests: passerine birds direct endozoochorous seed dispersal towards tree stumps, which can offer suitable conditions for seedling establishment. However, the spatiotemporal variability both in forest stand structure and in stump conditions have a strong influence on the success of sexual recruitment via this pathway.
18	Insight into a complex of phenolic compounds in plump fruits (Prunus domestica L.) in the conditions of Tambov oblast	The fruits of Prunus domestica L. are a valuable source of phenolic compounds, in particular hydroxycinnamic acids and their esters. Hybrid origin of Prunus domestica hexaploid species, the ample number of the varieties, and expanded geograph y of the cultivation preclude scientists from arriving at a definitive conclusion on the content levels and composition of phenolic compounds in plum fruits. The goal of our study is to determine and identify the phenolic composition of fruits of Prunus domestica L. grown in Tambov oblast of the Russian Federation. The research focused on eight fresh-eating and all-purpose varieties. Experimental plantations were established in 2014 in the 6 x 3-m setup. The plum-cherry hybrid (SVG) 11-19 was used as a rootstock. The phenolic components of plum fruits were determined by reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP HPLC) using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system equipped with a DAD-3000 detector. A chromatography run of the plum fruit methanol extracts was performed through a mobile phase binary gradient represented by acetonitrile and aqueous potassium dihydrogen phosphate acidified with orthophosphoric acid to pH 2.5. The hydroxycinnamic acids in the plum fruits were determined to be as follows: 5.33-181.54 mg/100 g of 4-Caffeoylquinic acid, 1.69-31.73 mg/100 g of 5-Caffeoylquinic acid, 0.54-5.77 mg/100 g of 3-p-Coumaroylquinic acid, and 0.04-0.63 mg/100 g of 3-Caffeoylquinic acid. Quercitin-3-rutinoside at 0.77-9.17 mg/100 g was dominant among flavonols. Three anthocyanins, namely, cyanidin-3-glucoside, cyanidin-3-rutinoside, and peonidin-3-glucoside, were identified in the studied plum fruits. The structural composition of plum fruit anthocyanins was dominated by cyaniding-3-glucoside, accounting for 60 to 90% of the total anthocyanin content. The obtained data on the content of phenolic components in fruits of specified plum varieties (Prunus domestica L.) point toward the potential of the use of the specified plum varieties as a source of hydroxycinnamic acids, anthocyanins, and flavonols in the population diet.
19	Effect of rootstock selection on tree growth, yield, and fruit quality of lemon varieties cultivated in Greece	Lemon is a prominent citrus fruit that supports regional economies worldwide. Several agronomic and fruit quality attributes are affected by the rootstock selection, thus its selection is essential for a successful grove. This study aims to compare the agronomic and quality attributes of four lemon cultivars ('Mikrokarpo Messaras', 'Nouvel Athos', 'Femminello Commune,' and 'Zia gara Bianca') grafted onto three rootstocks ('Sour Orange', 'Yuma Ponderosa lemon', and 'Volkameriana'). The yield and rootstock/scion ratio were estimated along with fruit morphological characteristics (size, equatorial, and polar diameter). Internal fruit quality was also estimated (total soluble solids, total acidity, juiciness, ascorbic acid, total phenols, and total antioxidant activity). 'Volkameriana' rootstock stood out among the studied rootstocks, as all grafted lemon varieties increased their productivity. Its combination with the Italian cultivar 'Femminello Commune' exhibited enhanced tree vigor and tree yield. For all studied cultivars, the use of 'Volkameriana' or 'Yuma Ponderosa lemon' rootstocks decreased the total soluble content and total acidity, increased the ascorbic acid content, and did not influence the TSS/TA ratio, total phenols or total antioxidant activity. In conclusion, the vigorous 'Volkameriana' and 'Yuma Ponderosa lemon' rootstocks are a promising replacement for 'sour orange'. This research provides valuable insights into the potential use of 'Yuma Ponderosa lemon' as a rootstock for lemons, as existing literature is rather limited.
20	The state of apple	The RHS fruit naming service addresses the global fascination with apples beyond horticulture, catering to a rising demand for identification. Receiving 1000 to 1200 cultivars annually, the RHS covers the entire UK, aiming for comprehensive coverage, notably in the South East, South West, and North of England. Samples, sourced from diverse locations, inform planting trends and historical insights. Identification involves a mix of experience, books, online tools, and comparisons. DNA testing is a last resort. The top 10 cultivars in 2022, including Bramley's Seedling, reveal popular varieties and their characteristics. The service adapts to modern interests, receiving cultivars like Falstaff, reflecting a continual quest to preserve apple diversity.
21	Effects of cultivar and plant origin on the aeroponic production of potato minitubers	Aeroponics is eco-friendly, soilless technology for the cultivation of vegetable plants that can be used for the production of pathogen-free pre-basic seed potato, namely minitubers. In aeroponic modules, the underground parts of potato plants grow suspended in the mist of finely dispersed nutrient solution to produce tubers, while the shoots grow above the module under greenhouse conditions. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of the cultivar and origin of planting material on the minituber production in an aeroponic facility in Guca, Serbia. Two potato cultivars, Sinora and Agria, and two types of planting material, acclimated microplants and plants originating from sprouted minitubers, were used in the study. Plants were grown in the 2019 season with a planting density of 24 plants per m2 and ~14-day harvest intervals. Agria plants of both plant origins steadily tuberized during most of the cultivation period and formed a significantly larger number of minitubers (13.61) compared to cultivar Sinora (3.35), which quickly completed the growth cycle. In both investigated cultivars, the mass of formed minitubers was significantly higher in the plants originating from minitubers (18.80 g) compared to plants of in vitro origin (9.04 g). Agria plants of minituber origin produced the heaviest minitubers (19.05 g), while Sinora plants of in vitro origin formed the least heavy tubers (5.29 g). The highest yield of minitubers, 6.26 kg m-2, was recorded for Agria plants of minituber origin. The results of our study suggest that both plant origin and potato genotype significantly affect minituber production in aeroponics.
22	Infestation of pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) seedlings with the pinewood nematode Bursaphelenchus xylophilus Steiner and Buhrer (Nickle) through wood sawdust	Key message: There are various pathways for infesting pine trees with the pinewood nematode (PWN), Bursaphelenchus xylophilus. As a result of the experiment, we determined that sawdust infested with the nematode can pose a phytosanitary risk. Nematodes actively moved from infested sawdust into root or stem damaged pine seedlings. Context: The spread of PWN, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus in pine plantations and forests is caused by beetles of the genus Monochamus, but the nematode can also be introduced via different coniferous commodities. Aims: The study objective was to assess the possibility that injured roots and stems of Pinus sylvestris seedlings could be infested with PWN through nematode-infested sawdust.
23	Seed treatment potential for the improvement of lucerne seed performance and early field growth	Seed treatments have a potential to improve seed performance traits and consequently optimize crop establishment. However, there is a lack of systematic research for these techniques in lucerne, especially under field conditions. The goal of this study was to investigate the potential of various seed treatments on the improvement of lucerne germination and emergence under lab conditions and early seedling growth in the field. Compared treatments were heat treatment; seed priming with water, potassium permanganate, chitosan, vermitea, or bokashi juice; and seed coating with cinnamon, gypsum, wood ash, tannin quebracho, and cocoa powder. Among the seed priming methods, potassium permanganate and chitosan provided the best results in the improvement of seedling length or emergence dynamics, whilst coating with bentonite and gypsum could be recommended for having a positive impact on root development. Cinnamon powder significantly improved the emergence dynamics, seedling, and shoot length. The combination of priming and coating methods seems to be the most effective when assessed under the field conditions, where some positive response in root traits can be evaluated.
24	The content of Cd and Pb in herbs and single-component spices used in Polish cuisine	Spices and herbs play an important role in the human diet, mostly due to the presence of essential oils and high antioxidant activity. Therefore, the toxicity of metals raises concerns about the safety of consumption of spices and herbs. This paper examines the content of Cd and Pb in fresh and dried herbs and single-component spices that are the most popular in Polish cuisine: 100 samples of nine kinds of dried herbs, 184 samples of 15 kinds of fresh herbs and 148 samples of 14 kinds of loose single-component spices. The level of Cd and Pb was determined using the GF AAS method. The safety of herbs and spices for consumption was estimated based on the percentage intake of Cd and Pb compared with the tolerable intake (% TWI, % BMDL), chronic daily intake (CDI), target hazard quotient (THQ), hazard index (HI) and comparisons of the results of chemical analyses with the maximum admissible levels of Cd and Pb in Poland and in the European Union. Calculated per fresh weight of the product, dried herbs on average contained 0.134 +or- 0.168 mg of Cd and 0.548 +or- 0.161 mg of Pb per kg<sup>-1</sup>, fresh herbs on average contained 0.004 +or- 0.007 mg of Cd and 0.039 +or- 0.033 mg of Pb per kg<sup>-1</sup>, and the mean content of Cd in spices was 0.017 +or- 0.019 mg per kg<sup>-1</sup> and 0.064 +or- 0.050 mg of Pb. The % TWI, % BMDL, CDI, THQ and HI (Cd + Pb) for all the analysed products were lower than 1. The results do not imply a risk due to the supply of Cd and Pb with the diet to the human body, primarily due to the small intake of these products. However, it should be highlighted that the content of Cd in dried coriander and estragon and that of Pb in watercress, jiaogulan, celery, basil and dill exceeded the acceptable limit. Thus, their consumption for people from particularly sensitive groups such as babies, pregnant and breastfeeding women and people should be carefully limited.
25	Impact of quince clonal rootstocks on yield and fruit quality characteristics of European pear (Pyrus communis L.) cultivars	The study was conducted during two sequential research years of 2020 and 2021 at the fruit research station of Ondokuz Mayis University, Turkiye. The aim of the research was to assess the effect of quince clonal rootstocks (Province Quince BA29 [BA29], Quince A [QA], and Quince MC [MC]) on yield and fruit quality of pear cultivars ('Deveci', 'Williams', 'Santa Maria' and 'Abate Fetel'). Fruit weight, width, length, fruit stalk length and thickness, fruit color traits (L*, a*, b*, chroma, hue degrees ), fruit firmness, total soluble solids, acidity, pH, marketable fruit rate, black spotted fruit rate, and preharvest fruit drop rate were evaluated as quality properties. In the case of yield attributes, number of fruit per tree, yield per tree, yield per hectare, yield per trunk cross sectional area, and yield per canopy volume were taken into consideration. Results of the research revealed that all aforementioned evaluated characteristics were statistically significantly affected under three factors combination at the 5 level of significance (P < 0.05) when Duncan's multiple range test was applied to the data. In brief, it was revealed that treatment combinations affected yield and quality characteristics. In general, in terms of yield per tree and yield per hectare, it was observed that the 'Santa Maria' cultivar gave better results in all rootstocks.
26	Biodegradable mulching film vs. traditional polyethylene: effects on yield and quality of San Marzano tomato fruits	Mulching is a common practice for improving crop yield and obtaining an out-of-season production, but when made using plastic materials it can bring environmental problems due to the management and the disposal of films at the end of the cropping seasons. To increase the sustainability of this practice, recently, mulching films made with biodegradable organic materials have become more widely used. Our aim was to evaluate the effect of a biodegradable mulching film on yield and qualitative traits of the San Marzano tomato fruits over two years (2014 and 2015). Two different types of mulching were tested: (i) black biodegradable film (MB12) and (ii) black low-density polyethylene (LDPE) were compared to bare soil (BS). Both mulching films elicited a 25% increase in yield, mainly due to the significantly higher number of fruits per square meter, compared to BS. Both mulching films also elicited a 9.9% increase in total soluble solids and a 57% increase in carotenoid content, while firmness showed the highest value in BS fruits. MB12 determined the highest value of the Hunter color ratio a/b of tomato fruits, followed by LDPE, while the lowest value was recorded in BS fruits. Both mulching films elicited an increase of 9.6%, 26.0%, and 11.7% for flavonoids, polyphenols, and AsA, respectively. In 2014, the MB12 degradation started at 71 days after transplant (DAT); in 2015, at 104 DAT. Therefore, replacing polyethylene with biodegradable film would seem to be an agronomically efficient and environmentally sustainable practice.
27	Patterns of copper bioaccumulation and translocation in grapevine grafts depending on rootstocks	The long-term use of copper (Cu) fungicides in viticulture in Europe has led to Cu accumulation in vineyard top soils. However, less is known about the accumulation of Cu in grapevine grafts after the callusing process/before planting in the nursery. This paper presents the capacity of 5BB and SO4 rootstocks to accumulate Cu, as well as the patterns of translocation in the grafts. After heat forcing (callusing), the grapevine grafts of Sauvignon Blanc on 5BB and SO4 rootstocks were grown in pots for six months in a glasshouse and exposed to various Cu formulations (Cu-oxychloride, Cu-gluconate) and concentrations in peat (50, 150, 500, and 1000 mg Cu of dry weight (DW)). In addition to monitoring the shoot growth dynamics and analyzing the copper content in graft organs, bioaccumulation (BAFs) and translocation factors (TFs) of Cu were calculated. The mean Cu concentrations were ranked as follows: roots (15-164) > rootstock trunks (8-38) > canes (5-21) mg kg<sup>-1</sup> DW. The Cu concentrations depended on the Cu formulation and concentration in the substrate. Higher Cu content was found in the roots of both rootstocks (5BB and SO4, 23-155 and 15-164 mg kg<sup>-1</sup> DW, respectively) and the lowest in the canes (less than 10 mg kg<sup>-1</sup> DW) of grafts grown in Cu-oxychloride-treated peat. Based on the BAFs and TFs, both rootstocks could be considered as Cu exclusive. A higher translocation rate was determined in systemic Cu-gluconate and SO4 rootstock. With shoot length measurements, the significant inhibitory effects of Cu on grapevine grafts growth could not be confirmed, despite the inhibitory effects that were clearly expressed in the first two months of growth. Soils containing more than 500 mg Cu/kg<sup>-1</sup> are less suitable for growing vine grafts.
28	Analysis regarding the organization, establishment, maintenance and harvesting of sea bunckthorn in plantation	Romania brings its contribution to the European Union through a valuable heritage, with numerous species of plants and animals, some endemic and relict, among them medicinal plants and those with high nutritional value. Romania's geographical position and climate have always offered special conditions for favourable for the culture of fruit trees and shrubs. Around towns, in familiar gardens, in small spaces around buildings, on walls and trellises, the cultivation of various species of trees and shrubs is a leisure occupation and a source of fruit supply. Fruit trees and shrubs in parks, around houses, on roads and alignments, in addition to aesthetics and fruit production, contribute to improving the climate, preventing and combating environmental pollution. Hippophae rhamnoides-Sea buckthorn is a shrub of particular importance, found both in spontaneous flora and in controlled cultures. In Romania, sea buckthorn grows spontaneously in the Subcarpathian area of Moldova and Muntenia. Depending on the place where it is planted, sea buckthorn can grow as a shrub or tree at a height of 1.5 m to 3.5 m, or even more. In arid areas it can become creeping, being an adaptation to environmental conditions. Sea buckthorn is used in food, medicine, animal feed and forestry. Used in agriculture, buckthorn has a very important role in increasing the winter resistance of bees. From a nutritional point of view, sea buckthorn has a high content of minerals, vitamins, oils, acids and unsaturated fats, present in the fruits and leaves. Sea buckthorn fruits have a high content of vitamin E, C and carotenoids with strong oxidative action, which slow down aging. Sea buckthorn oil relieves light medication, heals wounds and skin lesions, burns and speeds up the healing process Considering the special valences in maintaining health and treating some ailments, we must take care of this natural wealth of Romania - buckhorn, and we must not consider it inexhaustible, in order not to disappear especially from the spontaneous flora before our eyes.
29	Germination ecology and growth phenology of cowvine (Ipomoea lonchophylla) as influenced by environmental parameters	Cowvine (Ipomoea lonchophylla J.M. Black) is a native and widely spread summer broadleaf weed in Australia. It contains glycoresins, which are toxic to livestock. However, limited information is available on seed germination ecology and growth phenology of this species. A series of experiments were conducted to determine the response of I. lonchophylla to different environmental conditions. Results showed that the primary dormancy exhibited by I. lonchophylla is due to the physical impediment of the hard seed coat. The seed germination percentage was the highest at the constant temperature of 27 C and alternating temperatures of 35/25 C. Germination of I. lonchophylla was not stimulated by light, suggesting that this species is non-photoblastic. Ipomoea lonchophylla germination was intolerant of a medium to high level of salt stress, and germination was completely inhibited at 250 mM NaCl. The emergence of I. lonchophylla was not restricted by seeding depth up to 8 cm, but only 5% emergence was recorded when seeds were planted at a 16-cm depth. The germination percentage was also drastically reduced by 90% to 100% after exposure to either 3 mo in silage, 48-h digestion in steers, or silage plus digestion treatments. The growth and reproductive phenology of I. lonchophylla was affected by emergence time. Plants that emerged in late spring (November 15) were able to produce more berries per plant than those that emerged in midsummer (January 15) in southern New South Wales. Information gained in our study concerning high soil salinity, ensiling, and digestion will help to develop more sustainable and effective integrated weed management strategies for controlling and reducing the spread of this weed.
30	No evidence for seed transmission of tomato yellow leaf curl Sardinia virus in tomato	Seed transmission is an important factor in the epidemiology of plant pathogens. Geminiviruses are serious pests spread in tropical and subtropical regions. They are transmitted by hemipteran insects, but a few cases of transmission through seeds were recently reported. Here, we investigated the tomato seed transmissibility of the begomovirus tomato yellow leaf curl Sardinia virus (TYLCSV), one of the agents inducing the tomato yellow leaf curl disease, heavily affecting tomato crops in the Mediterranean area. None of the 180 seedlings originating from TYLCSV-infected plants showed any phenotypic alteration typical of virus infection. Moreover, whole viral genomic molecules could not be detected in their cotyledons and true leaves, neither by membrane hybridization nor by rolling-circle amplification followed by PCR, indicating that TYLCSV is not a seed-transmissible pathogen for tomato. Examining the localization of TYLCSV DNA in progenitor plants, we detected the virus genome by PCR in all vegetative and reproductive tissues, but viral genomic and replicative forms were found only in leaves, flowers and fruit flesh, not in seeds and embryos. Closer investigations allowed us to discover for the first time that these embryos were superficially contaminated by TYLCSV DNA but whole genomic molecules were not detectable. Therefore, the inability of TYLCSV genomic molecules to colonize tomato embryos during infection justifies the lack of seed transmissibility observed in this host.
31	Improving field establishment and yield in seed propagated Miscanthus through manipulating plug size, sowing date and seedling age	Biomass crops provide significant potential to substitute for fossil fuels and mitigate against climate change. It is widely acknowledged that significant scale up of biomass crops is required to help reach net zero targets. Miscanthus is a leading biomass crop embodying many characteristics that make it a highly sustainable source of biomass but planted area remains low. Miscanthus is commonly propagated via rhizome, but efficient alternatives may increase uptake and help diversify the cultivated crop. Using seed-propagate plug plants of Miscanthus has several potential benefits such as improving propagation rates and scale up of plantations. Plugs also provide an opportunity to vary the time and conditions under protected growth, to achieve optimal plantlets before planting. We varied combinations of glasshouse growth period and field planting dates under UK temperate conditions, which demonstrated the special importance of planting date on yield, stem number and establishment rates of Miscanthus. We also propagated Miscanthus in four different commercial plug designs that contained different volumes of substrate, the resulting seedlings were planted at three different dates into field trials. In the glasshouse, plug design had significant effects on above and belowground biomass accumulation and at a later time point belowground growth was restricted in some plug designs. After subsequent growth in the field, plug design and planting date had a significant effect on yield. The effects of plug design on yield were no longer significant after a second growth season but planting date continued to have a significant effect. After the second growth year, it was found that planting date had a significant effect on surviving plants, with the mid-season planting producing higher survival rates over all plug types. Establishment was positively correlated with DM biomass produced in the first growth season. Sowing date had a significant effect on establishment but the impacts of plug design were more nuanced and were significant at later planting dates. We discuss the potential to use the flexibility afforded by seed propagation of plug plants to deliver significant impacts in achieving high yield and establishment of biomass crops during the critical first two years of growth.
32	Experimental thermocline deepening highlights the resilience of the seagrass Posidonia oceanica: an opportunity to investigate shoot adaptability	The deepening of the thermocline, correlated to the rising temperature, can contribute affecting seagrass performance in a changing climate scenario. Here, the effect of the thermocline deepening on the seagrass Posidonia oceanica has been investigated in Cyprus through a manipulative experiment that allowed also testing the effects of the irradiance, origin depth and translocation. P. oceanica shoots were collected from 31 m of depth and transplanted at 12 m under a shading net, simulating the 31 m light conditions. Morphology (i.e. leaf area, leaf necrosis, number of leaves) and physiology (i.e. growth rate) were evaluated. Thermocline and origin depth effects were found with an increase of leaf necrosis, while a translocation effect was highlighted by a decrease in leaf area. No differences in shoot growth rate due to treatments were found. This experiment indicated an overall wide morphological and physiological acclimation of P. oceanica cuttings in coping with future thermocline conditions and it indirectly provides information for restoration efforts.
33	Multispecies crop mixtures increase insect biodiversity in an intercropping experiment	Recent biodiversity declines require action across sectors such as agriculture. The situation is particularly acute for arthropods, a species-rich taxon providing important ecosystem services. To counteract the negative consequences of agricultural intensification, creating a less hostile agricultural 'matrix' through growing crop mixtures can reduce harm for arthropods without yield losses. While grassland biodiversity experiments showed positive plant biodiversity effects on arthropods, experiments manipulating crop diversity and agrochemical input used to study arthropods are lacking. Here, we experimentally manipulated crop diversity (1-3 species, fallows), crop species (wheat, faba bean, linseed and oilseed rape) and agrochemical input (high vs. low) and studied responses of arthropod biodiversity. We tested whether arthropod responses were affected by crop diversity, mixtures and management. Additionally, we measured crop biomass. Crop biomass increased with crop diversity under high-input management, while under low management intensity, biomass was highest in two-species mixtures. Increasing crop diversity positively affected arthropod abundance and diversity, under both low- and high-input management. Crop mixtures containing faba bean, linseed or oilseed rape had particularly high arthropod diversity. Mass-flowering crops attracted more arthropods than legumes or cereals. Integrating intercropping into agricultural systems could increase flower visits by insects up to 1.5 million per hectare, thus likely also supporting pollination and pest-control ecosystem services. Flower visitor network complexity increased in mixtures containing linseed and faba bean and under low-input management. Intercropping can counteract insect declines in farmland by creating beneficial matrix habitat without compromising crop yield.
34	Microbiological indication of soils in forest plantations of the Shirinskaya steppe	To control soil degradation and desertification, sustainable long-term protective forest plantations that perform water and soil protection functions are commonly used on the erosion-prone lands of steppe ecosystems. In the Shirinskaya dry lake-basin steppe (Khakassia) in the coastal zone of Lake Shira, the staff of the Sukachev Institute of Forest, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, has created artificial plantings of forest cultures (Pinus sylvestris L., Larix sibirica L., and Ulmus humilis L.) and provenance trials (P. sibirica Du Tour and P. sylvestris). A wildfire damaged the coastal 40-year-old forest cultures in 2015; the surface soil layer was burnt out. Agrotechnical soil cultivation for planting provenance trials (2017) and wildfire in forest cultures affected the state of soil microbiomes. The aim of the research is to assess the rate of recovery and formation of biological soil properties in forest plantations after disturbances (wildfire and agrotechnical influences) in the coastal dry-steppe zone of Lake Shira using microbiological indicators. The research objects are the Burnt Areas (postfire and postconflagration areas) and Provenance Trial Plantation sites. The use of microbial indicators shows that the soil microbiomes on the burnt sites are restored with different intensities. The recovery of soil microbiomes on the postfire sites is much faster than in the postconflagration sites, as is evidenced by the high values of the total number of microorganisms (TNM), microbial biomass (MB), enzymatic activity (EA), and humification coefficient (C<sub>h</sub>), which are close to the control values. Specific microbial respiration (qCO<sub>2</sub>) is within the range of natural variability. The burnt soil is characterized by an increased proportion of hydrolytic microorganisms actively participating in the decomposition of half-burnt plant residues. On the provenance trial sites under the pine seedlings, specific rhizosphere microbiomes are forming due to the influence of the root exudates of climatypes. The values of TNM, ETGM, MB, EA, and qCO<sub>2</sub> change either upwards or downwards; the state of microbial communities has not reached its ecophysiological norm.
35	Functional analysis of the P-type ATPases Apt2-4 from Cryptococcus neoformans by heterologous expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae	Lipid flippases of the P4-ATPase family actively transport phospholipids across cell membranes, an activity essential for key cellular processes such as vesicle budding and membrane trafficking. Members of this transporter family have also been implicated in the development of drug resistance in fungi. The encapsulated fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans contains four P4-ATPases, among which Apt2-4p are poorly characterized. Using heterologous expression in the flippase-deficient S. cerevisiae strain dnf1dnf2drs2, we tested their lipid flippase activity in comparison to Apt1p using complementation tests and fluorescent lipid uptake assays. Apt2p and Apt3p required the co-expression of the C. neoformans Cdc50 protein for activity. Apt2p/Cdc50p displayed a narrow substrate specificity, limited to phosphatidylethanolamine and -choline. Despite its inability to transport fluorescent lipids, the Apt3p/Cdc50p complex still rescued the cold-sensitive phenotype of dnf1dnf2drs2, suggesting a functional role for the flippase in the secretory pathway. Apt4p, the closest homolog to Saccharomyces Neo1p, which does not require a Cdc50 protein, was unable to complement several flippase-deficient mutant phenotypes, neither in the presence nor absence of a beta-subunit. These results identify C. neoformans Cdc50 as an essential subunit for Apt1-3p and provide a first insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying their physiological functions.
36	Formation of seed potato yield depending on the elements of cultivation technology	It is possible to realise the maximum genetic potential of modern potato varieties by improving the elements of agricultural technology, in particular, optimising plant nutrition, which determines the relevance of this study. The purpose of the study was to substantiate the specific features of potato productivity formation depending on the elements of growing technology in Forest-Steppe conditions. Field studies were conducted during 2019-2021 on chernozem soils. The features of growth and development of potato varieties of various ripeness groups Laperla, Granada, and Memphis in Forest-Steppe conditions are examined. It is established that the yield of potato seed tubers of the varieties under study varies depending on the dose and method of fertilisation, the fraction of planting tubers, and varietal characteristics. The highest indicators of individual productivity of potato plants of the Laperla, Granada, and Memphis varieties were formed when locally applied in rows N45R45K45 against the background of semi-rotted manure, phosphorus-potassium fertiliser, and the use of seed tubers with a fraction of >60 mm. As a result of the action of the factors under study, the number of stems in the bush and under it increased. A strong direct correlation was established between the number of stems in the bush and the number of tubers (r=0.78), with a coefficient of determination of 61.0%. The maximum yield of potato tubers of the examined potato varieties (29.7-41.1 t/ha) was obtained by local application of N45R45K45 against the background of semi-rotted manure and phosphorus-potassium fertiliser, depending on the size of seed tubers by the largest transverse diameter. It was identified that the use of tubers with a fraction of >60 mm for planting the potato varieties under study is irrational since the consumption of seed material exceeds the yield growth indicators. It was determined that Laperla, Granada, and Memphis tubers with a fraction of 28-60 mm are optimal for planting potato varieties of different ripeness groups. The research results can be used to adjust the elements of agricultural technology of seed potatoes, obtain high-quality planting material, and conduct profitable agribusiness.
37	Low-density polyethylene film biodegradation potential by fungal species from Thailand	Accumulated plastic waste in the environment is a serious problem that poses an ecological threat. Plastic waste has been reduced by initiating and applying different alternative methods from several perspectives, including fungal treatment. Biodegradation of 30 fungi from Thailand were screened in mineral salt medium agar containing low-density polyethylene (LDPE) films. Diaporthe italiana, Thyrostroma jaczewskii, Collectotrichum fructicola, and Stagonosporopsis citrulli were found to grow significantly by culturing with LDPE film as the only sole carbon source compared to those obtained from Aspergillus niger. These fungi were further cultured in mineral salt medium broth containing LDPE film as the sole carbon source for 90 days. The biodegradation ability of these fungi was evaluated from the amount of CO<sub>2</sub> and enzyme production. Different amounts of CO<sub>2</sub> were released from D. italiana, T. jaczewskii, C. fructicola, S. citrulli, and A. niger culturing with LDPE film, ranging from 0.45 to 1.45, 0.36 to 1.22, 0.45 to 1.45, 0.33 to 1.26, and 0.37 to 1.27 g/L, respectively. These fungi were able to secrete a large amount of laccase enzyme compared to manganese peroxidase, and lignin peroxidase enzymes detected under the same conditions. The degradation of LDPE films by culturing with these fungi was further determined. LDPE films cultured with D. italiana, T. jaczewskii, C. fructicola, S. citrulli, and A. niger showed weight loss of 43.90%, 46.34%, 48.78%, 45.12%, and 28.78%, respectively. The tensile strength of LDPE films cultured with D. italiana, T. jaczewskii, C. fructicola, S. citrulli, and A. niger also reduced significantly by 1.56, 1.78, 0.43, 1.86, and 3.34 MPa, respectively. The results from Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) reveal an increasing carbonyl index in LDPE films culturing with these fungi, especially C. fructicola. Analysis of LDPE films using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) confirmed the biodegradation by the presence of morphological changes such as cracks, scions, and holes on the surface of the film. The volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted from LDPE films cultured with these fungi were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). VOCs such as 1,3-dimethoxy-benzene, 1,3-dimethoxy-5-(1-methylethyl)-benzene, and 1,1-dimethoxy-decane were detected among these fungi. Overall, these fungi have the ability to break down and consume the LDPE film. The fungus C. fructicola is a promising resource for the biodegradation of LDPE which may be further applied in plastic degradation systems based on fungi.
38	Defaunation changes leaf trait composition of recruit communities in tropical forests in French Guiana	Hunting impacts tropical vertebrate populations, causing declines of species that function as seed dispersers and predators, or that browse seedlings and saplings. Whether and how the resulting reductions in seed dispersal, seed predation, and browsing translate to changes in the tree composition is poorly understood. Here, we assess the effect of defaunation on the functional composition of communities of tree recruits in tropical rainforests in French Guiana. We selected eight sites along a gradient of defaunation, caused by differences in hunting pressure, in otherwise intact old-growth forests in French Guiana. We measured shifts in functional composition by comparing leaf and fruit traits and wood density between tree recruits (up to 5 cm diameter at breast height) and adults, and tested whether and how these compositional shifts related to defaunation. We found a positive relationship with defaunation for shifts in specific leaf area, a negative relationship for shifts of leaf toughness and wood density, and a weak relationship for shifts in fruit traits. Our results suggest that the loss of vertebrates affects ecological processes such as seed dispersal and browsing, of which browsing remains understudied. Even though these changes sometimes seem minor, together they result in major shifts in forest composition. These changes have long-term ramifications that may alter forest dynamics for generations.
39	Adding fish waste to the diet of Iceland scallop Chlamys islandica: effects on feeding and reproductive ability	Organic enrichment from fish farming may impact benthic species and habitats in adjacent areas. Norwegian salmon farming is continuously growing, but, due to area conflicts and severe sea-lice problems in the western areas, growth of the industry is focused in the northern areas. Knowledge is scarce on how an increase in fish farming will impact Arctic and subarctic species and habitats. One such species is the Iceland scallop Chlamys islandica, distributed from the Lofoten Islands in Nordland County to the Varangerfjord in Troms and Finnmark County. To study the impact of fine-particle fish faeces on feeding and reproductive ability in adult Iceland scallop, particles < 41 m of finfish waste were added to the diet. Effects were tested via shortterm (weeks) feeding studies using 2 diets, 100% cultured algal species and a 50% mix of algae and fish waste. In addition, a 100% fish waste diet was used to study longer-term effects on reproductive ability (months). Feeding (% particle clearance and feeding rate) on the microalgae diet tended to be higher than that on the diet containing fish waste, but the difference was significant only in 2 out of 4 cases. We did not find any effect of diets on reproductive ability (gonad development and fatty acid profiles) of scallops. Lack of knowledge on sufficient food levels for gonad maturation in this species may have affected the results. We suggest that future work includes the transplant of scallops from a reference site to fish production sites and that investigations begin immediately after spawning early in scallop gonad development.
40	Chemical composition of tissues of Syringa vulgaris L. and soil features in abandoned cemeteries	Abandoned anthropogenic sites are transformed when they come into use. In the present study, such objects were abandoned Evangelical cemeteries located in the Land of the Great Mazurian Lakes (northern Poland). This study aims to compare the concentrations of selected major (Ca, Na, Mg, Al, Fe) and potentially toxic elements (Zn, Cd, Pb) in the roots, leaves, and branches of Syringa vulgaris and buried necrosols and unburied soils in which this species grows. The soils analysed differ in their profile structure; in the case of burial necrosols, anthropogenic layers are present, while Brunic Arenosol has a natural horizon arrangement. Regarding pH, the soils analysed are characterised in the weakly acidic (6.6-6.8) to alkaline (7.2-8.6) range, both in KCl and H<sub>2</sub>O. Total phosphorus has high values in the humus and anthropogenic horizons, especially at coffin sites (Rudowka Mala: layer of Ccoffin - 759 mg.kg<sup>-1</sup>; Szymonka - 844 mg.kg<sup>-1</sup>). Necrosols are characterised by a slightly higher variation in major element content than soils outside the burial area. The highest elemental content in Syringa vulgaris is accumulated in leaves and roots. Potassium (K) has the highest content in the studied tissues, and cadmium (Cd) is the lowest. The study showed no significant differences in heavy metal accumulation for plants directly associated with necrosols and soils formed outside of burials, which is confirmed by analyses of environmental indicators. The study showed that plant chemistry is more influenced by the soil substrate and soil-forming process than the soil anthropogenisation associated with burials. There was no significant effect of burials on the chemical composition of individual parts of Syringa vulgaris.
41	Application of real-time PCR for the detection and quantification of oomycetes in ornamental nursery stock	Numerous Phytophthora and Pythium disease outbreaks have occurred in Europe following inadvertent introduction of contaminated ornamental plants. Detection and identification of pathogens are crucial to reduce risks and improve plant biosecurity in Europe and globally. Oomycete diversity present in roots and compost was determined in 99 hardy woody plants bought from nurseries, retailers and internet sellers, using both isolations and molecular analyses. Oomycete DNA was quantified using real-time PCR of environmental DNA from the plants using three loci: ITS, trnM-trnP-trnM and atp9-nad9. At least one oomycete species was isolated from 89.9% of plants using classical techniques. In total, 10 Phytophthora spp., 17 Pythium spp. and 5 Phytopythium spp. were isolated. Oomycetes were isolated from 86% of asymptomatic plants, but real-time PCR demonstrated that oomycetes were associated with all plants tested. More oomycete DNA occurred in composts in comparison with roots and filters from baiting water (a mean of 7.91 ng g<sup>-1</sup>, 6.55 x 10<sup>-1</sup> ng g<sup>-1</sup> and 5.62 x 10<sup>-1</sup> ng g<sup>-1</sup> of oomycete DNA detected in compost with ITS, trnM and atp9 probes, respectively); the ITS probe detected the highest quantities of oomycete DNA. No significant differences were found in quantities of oomycete DNA detected using real-time PCR in plants purchased online or from traditional retailers.
42	Changes to volatile profiles of arborvitae, Thuja occidentalis, from drought and insect infestation: olfactory cues for the cypress bark beetle, Phloeosinus aubei	The cypress bark beetle, Phloeosinus aubei (Coleoptera, Curculionidae, Scolytinae) prefers to build breeding galleries in decaying host trees. However, volatile cues specific to decaying or actively infested trees have not yet been reported. Any such information would be useful for the management of this invasive, wood-boring species that has become established across Europe in the temperate zone and is now a key pest of ornamental Cupressaceae in nurseries and urban landscapes. Our objective was to reveal key components in host volatiles specific to stressed trees, which could be potential signals for the pest of its suitability for colonisation. Volatile profiles of arborvitae, Thuja occidentalis 'Smaragd' suffering from either dehydration or fresh infestation of P. aubei was collected and compared to that samples from healthy control trees. Analyses of volatiles by gas chromatography coupled to an electroantennographic detector revealed substantial differences between healthy, dehydrated and infested trees. Structural elucidation of the major antennally active components revealed that both a-pinene and a-thujene were prevalent in the volatiles of infested trees, whilst a-thujone was the major component in volatiles of healthy trees. In volatiles collected from trunks housing fresh P. aubei female nuptial chambers, sharp increases of beta-pinene, myrcene, limonene, and p-cymene were noticed, alongside trace amounts of camphene and fenchene. Volatiles collected from fresh frass showed a similar profile, but with a somewhat smaller amount of limonene. Fenchone was present in each type of volatiles, however, only in low amounts. Further studies should be directed to reveal the behavioural role of these components, which could be helpful in developing kairomone-based techniques for monitoring the flight of the pest in stands of scale-leafed trees.
43	Morpho-physiological effects of irrigation with saline water in Ex vitro plants of Juglans regia 'Sorrento'	Soil salinization is a global problem limiting growth and economical yield in fruit species including walnut. Knowledge of the response of varieties and cultivars to salinity can represent an important contribution to future walnut plantation in areas affected by soil salinization. Juglans regia 'Sorrento' is a commercially important Italian variety. The present work aimed to explore the morpho-physiological response to NaCl-induced stress in 'Sorrento' plants using clonally propagated ex vitro plantlets to reduce the impact of genetic variation. Ex vitro acclimatized plants were exposed to salinity conditions by irrigating pot soil with half-strength Hoagland solution containing 100 mM NaCl for 20 days. Salt-induced effects on plant growth, chlorophyll and carotenoid content, osmolality, membrane injury and on activities of antioxidant enzymes catalase and guaiacol peroxidase (G-POD) in leaves were evaluated. Morphological and growth parameters were not significantly altered by salt stress with respect to the control. Slight differences in leaf necrosis and absence of injury in the membranes, stable content of photosynthetic pigments, and an increase in G-POD activity were also found in salt-treated plants. These results collectively suggest that 'Sorrento' has potential for the cultivation in salinized environments.
44	Masting increases seedling recruitment near and far: predator satiation and improved dispersal in a fleshy-fruited tree	The animal dispersal hypothesis predicts that mast seeding can increase dispersal rate of seeds by dispersers and enhance reproductive success of plants. However, in contrast to pollination efficiency and predator satiation hypothesis, the animal dispersal hypothesis has received mixed support. Using 12-year data on fruit production and seedling recruitment of a fleshy-fruited tree rowan (Sorbus aucuparia, Rosaceae), we tested if an increase in the fruit production at the population level results in higher proportion of fruits recruiting into seedlings. Recruitment was recorded near (under rowans) and far (under heterospecifics) from conspecifics. Higher recruitment rates under rowans would support predator satiation hypothesis. Higher recruitment rates under heterospecific trees, where fruits can only arrive with animal assistance, would support animal dispersal hypothesis. High population-level fruit production increased the proportion of fruits recruiting into seedlings both near and far from rowans. In contrast, high individual-level fruit production did not have a positive effect on the proportion of fruits recruiting into seedlings. Synthesis. Population-level synchronisation of fruit production is required to generate a more effective plant regeneration. Our findings show that masting enhances seedling recruitment through predator satiation and increased seed dispersal by frugivores. The results provide support for both animal dispersal and predator satiation hypotheses indicating that both mechanisms can operate simultaneously.
45	Bryophytes of Europe Traits (BET) data set: a fundamental tool for ecological studies	Bryophytes are a diverse group of organisms with unique properties, yet they are severely underrepresented in plant trait databases. Building on the recently published European Red List of bryophytes and previous trait compilations, we present the Bryophytes of Europe Traits (BET) data set, including biological traits such as those related to life history, growth habit, sexual and vegetative reproduction; ecological traits such as indicator values, substrate and habitat; and bioclimatic variables based on the species' European range. The data set includes values for 65 traits and 25 bioclimatic variables, containing more than 135,000 trait values with a completeness of 82.7% on average. The data set will enable future studies in bryophyte biology, ecology and conservation, and may help to answer fundamental questions in bryology.
46	Compatibility of interspecific hybridization between tulip cultivars and wild species native to China	Interspecific hybridization is an important means of breeding new cultivars with novel characteristics introduced from their parents. The interspecific hybridization was carried out between five tulip cultivars 'Heart of Poland', 'Golden Parade', 'Purple Dream', 'Crystal Star', 'Bolroyal Dream' and wild specie Tulipa altaica. In five combinations, the compatibility was observed including pollen germinability, stigma receptivity, fruit-setting, hybrid seed germination and bulblet formation in this paper. The results showed that T. altaica has the highest germination rate (69.58%) compared with any other parents. The highest stigmatic receptivity of five female cultivars was recorded on 10:00 am one day after flowering. The crosses of 'Heart of Poland' x T. altaica and 'Bolroyal Dream' x T. altaica displayed a higher percentage of fruit setting with 79.32 and 82.23%, respectively. A total of 698 hybrid seeds were obtained from interspecific hybridization combinations, including 'Heart of Poland' x T. altaica, 'Purple dream' x T. altaica and 'Bolroyal Dream' x T. altaica. In contrast, other two crosses were completely unsuccessful when 'Golden Parade' and 'Crystal Star' were used as female parents. The higher rates of seed germination and bulblet formation were recorded in two crosses with 63.45 and 55.63% in 'Heart of Poland' x T. altaica, 58.35 and 61.88% in 'Bolroyal Dream' x T. altaica. The results of this paper could provide some useful information about the interspecific cross between T. altaica and tulip cultivars.
47	Effects of species and varietal differences on intergeneric cross-compatibility between apple and pear	Hybridization across species and genus has been utilized to improve agriculturally important traits in crops. These interspecific and intergeneric hybridizations are often inhibited by reproductive barriers at the prezygotic and postzygotic stages. In this study, we used intergeneric hybridization between apple and pear to investigate the effects of species and varietal differences on pollen tube growth, seed germination, and seedling survival in a wide range of germplasms . In apple pistils pollinated by pears, inferior pollen tube growth was often observed for European pear cultivars, whereas hybrid seedlings derived from a cross between apple and European pear showed higher survival rate. In contrast, Japanese pear and Chinese pear pollination resulted in higher fruit setting which likely resulted from a higher rate of compatible pistils but a lower rate of seedling survival. Our results suggest the presence of both prezygotic and postzygotic barriers that occur independently in different crossing combinations. We also developed a Cleaved Amplified Polymorphic Sequence marker for detecting intergeneric hybrids derived from a wide range of crosses between apples and pears. The results of the present study will help in the development of intergeneric hybrids between apple and pear for introducing valuable traits from a diverse gene pool.
48	Investigating the effects of fish effluents as organic fertilisers on onion (Allium cepa) yield, soil nutrients, and soil microbiome	Although waste waters from aquaculture farms, known as fish effluents, have been shown to be a viable source of nutrients for crop production, their use is not permitted in organic production under the current European regulatory framework, Council Regulation (EU) 2018/848. In contrast, the use of livestock manure as fertiliser is allowed and indeed encouraged. In this work we tested the effects of two types of fish effluents - filtered and unfiltered fish waters - from an aquaponic system on the yield of onions (Allium cepa) and the soil nutrients and microbiome, compared with a fertilisation regime using composted horse manure. Soil fertility was enhanced by the addition of fish effluents, in particular in the soil treated with unfiltered fish water or sludge, which resulted in the soil with the highest nitrate content. Fertilisation with fish water and aerobically treated fish sludge resulted in higher yields than the manure, performing the best in all growth and yield measurements. The bulb weight and bulb diameter in the onions fertilised with manure were 102.43 g +or- 7.26 and 61 mm +or- 2.05 respectively, the ones fertilised with filtered fish effluents were 126 g +or- 6.64 and 66.52 mm +or- 2.17, and the ones fertilised with filtered (fish water) and unfiltered (sludge) fish effluents were 133.32 g +or- 6.86 and 67.66 mm +or- 1.81. The horse manure significantly affected the microbial community structure of the soil, resulting in a higher species diversity compared with the fish effluents, with the most predominant genus types being Flavobacterium, Pseudarthrobacter, Sphingomonas, Massilia, Nitrososphaera, Pseudomonas and Nocardioides. However, the microbial activity in the soil with fish effluents was also significant, which indicates that the soil treated in this way can be considered a 'living soil', as required for organic certification in the EU. Overall, the results confirm the findings of previous studies on the effectiveness of fish effluents as fertilisers, and highlight the superior performance of fish effluents compared with a livestock manure, thus directly questioning the prohibition on using fish effluents in organic agriculture.
49	Comparison of the biomass and dendrometric parameters of Norway spruce with its different representations in young stands at lower altitudes in the Czech Republic	"In forestry, it is still common to plant the seedlings of and cultivate Norway spruce (Picea abies L. Karst) at lower altitudes; however, the climatic change that has been occurring increases evaporative demands in these areas. As a result, the spruce evidently suffers from drought, withers and loses its power to grow, thus, influencing stem thickness and tree-height growth, as well as biomass production. Therefore, the growth and biomass production of young (5-, 15- and 25-year-old) Norway spruce stands at these altitudes (i.e., from 200 to 500 m a.s.l.) was surveyed, as a case study, across the Training Forest Enterprise ""Masaryk Forest"" Krtiny. There, 48 stands with a varied representation of spruce (i.e., up to 30%, 31%-60%, 61%-90% and over 91%) were analyzed. In each stand, 12 trees were sampled across all social status classes (i.e., sub-dominant, co-dominant and dominant) in detail. Basic dendrometric parameters (such as the total tree height, height of the crown base and stem diameter at breast height) and the amount of the above-ground tree organ biomass (i.e., stem, branches and needles) were investigated. Based on the trends found in the biomass production here and climate change predictions, we recommend that Norway spruce be cultivated only in zones from an altitude of ca 400 m a.s.l., with an annual precipitation of 700 mm and an average annual temperature of 7 degrees C, and its percentage representation in the stand be no more than 30%."
50	Transgenerational effects of water limitation on reproductive mother plants in a common garden of the shrub Frangula alnus	A better understanding of responses to water limitation in woody species can help us to cope with the consequences of the progressing climate change. We focused on the putative transgenerational effects of water limitation in the maternal environment during reproduction. Water was restricted for cuttings of Frangula alnus Mill. in a common garden setting, with a Belgian (local), Italian and Swedish provenance, during the growing season of 2020 and mature berries were collected during the whole reproductive phase. Stones that were extracted from the berries were given a cold stratification. In the next spring, the germination percentage of the stones from the water restricted maternal environment was significantly higher than that of the stones from the normal maternal environment, for the three provenances, notwithstanding the fact that stone weight was not different. The timing of seedling emergence was advanced for the water-limited maternal environment, but only for the stones harvested when mature berry production was the highest (9th and 16th of July 2020). Population differentiation was observed for the timing of seedling emergence, which reflected population differentiation for bud burst of the mother plants in the common garden, including a counter-gradient effect for the Swedish provenance, and corroborating the suggestion that the timing of seedling emergence and leaf phenology may have a common genetic basis. In addition, the Swedish provenance displayed a somewhat more stable germination percentage over the whole berry collection period when the stones were harvested. A partitioning of variance analysis suggested that germination percentage is more genetically determined than timing of seedling emergence, probably reflecting the more important need to sense the environment for an adequate timing of emergence.
51	Invasive plants and agri-food waste extracts as sustainable alternatives for the pre-emergence urban weed control in Portugal central region	The continued use of synthetic herbicides to control weeds leads to environmental pollution and health issues. Consequently, chemical formulations have been increasingly banned. However, sustainable solutions are lacking in the market. Alternatively, valorisation of phytotoxic waste to reduce the herbicides use promotes sustainability, meeting circular economy. We aimed at assessing the herbicidal potential of aqueous extracts of waste from the management of invasive plants (Acacia dealbata bark, Oxalis pes-caprae biomass) and agri-food (spent coffee grounds) on common urban weeds (Achillea ageratum, Conyza canadensis and Dittrichia viscosa) in Portugal. In vitro (paper and soil) and pot assays (soil) were conducted to test the pre-emergence (germination and seedlings) and post-emergence (well-stablished plants) effect of waste extracts on these weeds. Extracts reduced pre-emergence performance of weeds, but marginally affected post-emergence parameters. Germination was inhibited up to 83% by O. pes-caprae in A. ageratum, up to 88% and 87% by A. dealbata and O. pes-caprae in C. canadensis, and up to 70% by concentration in D. viscosa. A. dealbata and O. pes-caprae extracts also drastically reduced radicle length (30% and 55% in A. ageratum, 77% and 81% in C. canadensis, 90% and 92% in D. viscosa, respectively). However, soil neutralized the inhibitory pre-emergence effect. The main findings highlight that the use of A. dealbata and O. pes-caprae extracts as bioherbicides may require an additional synthetic herbicides application, as extracts alone cannot fully control urban weeds in areas without soil. Combining bioherbicides and commercial formulations still reduces the application of toxic chemicals, promoting sustainability.
52	Effect of bioslurry effluent on seedling growth of Swiss chard (Beta vulgaris L.)	Glasshouse experiments to evaluate the effect of bioslurry effluent on seedling growth of Swiss chard (Beta vulgaris L) were conducted in summer 2017 and winter 2018 at Dohne Agriculture Development Institute, Stutterheim, Eastern Cape, South Africa. Two cultivars of Swiss chard, Star 1801 and Fordhook giant, were planted in 200 cavity trays using a hygromix commercial growing medium incorporated with fertilizer treatments at different rates of bioslurry: no incorporation (control), 50% bioslurry, 100% bioslurry, 200% bioslurry and the recommended rate of 2:3:4 (30) NPK fertilizers. In the glasshouse the experiments were arranged in a randomized complete block design (RCBD) which was replicated three times. At four weeks after germination, ten (10) seedlings per treatment were destructively sampled randomly to determine the plant growth and biological mass parameters: (i) Seedling height, shoot and root height; (ii) Seedling mass; (iii) Fresh shoot and fresh root mass as well as their dry mass; (iv) Nutrient content of leaves. The results indicated that fertilization with 100%Bioslurry produced significantly taller seedlings and shoot height, while the shortest seedlings were obtained from the recommended inorganic fertilizer. Fertilization with 200%Bioslurry and the control treatment produced significantly higher biological yield compared to other treatments. The interaction between fertilizer treatments, cultivar and season indicated that summer season performed better compared to winter in seedling growth and development, and Fordhook giant fertilized with 100% and 200% bioslurry was superior compared to Star 1801. Fertilization with 50% bioslurry resulted in seedlings with higher sodium, while the seedlings grown in the control treatment showed higher copper content. The highest manganese was obtained from the seedlings fertilized with the inorganic fertilizer. It is therefore, concluded that fertilization with bioslurry at 100% and 200% bioslurry application rates enhanced the growth and quality of Swiss chard seedlings.
53	Identification and management of Tomato brown rugose fruit virus in greenhouses in Mexico	Tomato brown rugose fruit virus (ToBRFV) has become a cause of great concern in the global tomato agro-industry since its first report in Israel in 2014. Global tomato production is affected by ToBRFV, and management practices are being evaluated. We tested seed lots from international producers as well as greenhouse substrates and water wells as possible sources of virus contamination. We identified a second introduction of ToBRFV in Mexico by a strain closely resembling isolates from the Netherlands and the Middle East. ToBRFV was detected by RT-PCR in seed coats and epicotyls (from commercial seeds and seedlings obtained from infected tomato plants), indicating a transmission rate of 9%. Virus-like particles (VLPs) were found in wells used for irrigation in greenhouses, but these exhibited low infectivity. These findings suggest that water sources could serve as ToBRFV reservoirs. We evaluated four chemical and six thermal methods for sanitizing substrates, plasticware, and other greenhouse utensils, using detached leaf bioassays in Nicotiana rustica. The most effective chemical sanitization method was treatment with glutaraldehyde plus quaternary ammonium salts and pentapotassium salts. The most effective heat treatment was at 92 degrees C for 30 minutes, which inactivated the virus. Tomato producers could implement these sanitization methods to control ToBRFV.
54	Canadian Plant Disease Survey 2023 volume 103: disease highlights 2022	Diseases of berry, vegetable, ornamental nursery and landscape plants in south coastal British Columbia submitted to Elmhirst Diagnostics & Research in 2022 and causal agents are listed. In April - May, cold, wet soils led to nutrient deficiency symptoms on foliage and cool, rainy weather through June led to high levels of botrytis in berries and many other crops. This was followed by hot, dry weather from July-September causing heat and drought stress on many crops and landscape plants. Powdery mildew was severe on many nursery and landscape plants, such as big-leaf maple (Acer macrophyllum). No significant new diseases were observed.
55	Application of living mulch in rows of the apple trees on several rootstocks - long-term evaluation	The long-term influence of several living mulches on apple tree growth, nutrient status, yield, and fruit quality concerning the year of cover crop sowing in tree rows was evaluated in the Lower Silesia region in the southwestern part of Poland. The estimation was conducted in six apple tree 'Ligol' populations differentiated by the rootstock: M.26, M.9, P 60, P 2, P 16, and P 22. In experiment no. 1, one-year-old nursery stock was planted, and perennial living mulches were sown: colonial bent grass (Agrostis vulgaris With.) and white clover (Trifolium repens L.) in the same year and blue fescue (Festuca ovina L.) in the following year. In experiment no. 2, which involved two-year-old stock, the sowing of blue fescue was delayed until the second, third, fourth, and fifth years following orchard planting. The presence of the cover crop significantly affected young tree growth when one-year-old trees were planted. The sowing of the living mulch in the first or the second year after tree planting led to a significant reduction in the cumulative yield obtained from the young trees. The living mulch improved the red coloration of the fruit skin in the young orchard, but it caused a reduction in the mean fruit weight and size. However, it also contributed to decreased nitrogen concentration in the leaves of the apple trees, and the tree tolerance to living mulch increased as the orchard aged. A choice of semidwarf rootstock, postponed sowing of cover crop, and high-quality nursery stock were recognized as the most important factors for fostering apple tree tolerance to living mulches in tree rows.
56	Adjuvant effects on pyraclostrobin and boscalid residues, systemic movement, and dietary risk in garlic under field conditions	Adjuvants are supplemental substances added to pesticide tank mixtures to enhance their efficacy by altering the dispersing, emulsifying, spreading, sticking, and wetting properties of the spray mixture. The goals of this study were an assessment of the effectiveness of pyraclostrobin and boscalid against garlic rust; the fungicide's dissipation and translocation within plant tissue in the presence of commercial adjuvants DashR HC EC; and the validation of an analytical method for concurrently determining boscalid and pyraclostrobin in green garlic and garlic bulbs. Pyraclostrobin and boscalid retention in green garlic and the dietary exposure risks were also evaluated. The adjuvant DashR HC EC is an emulsifiable concentrate containing fatty acids, methyl esters, and alkoxylated alcohol-phosphate esters. The test plots were sprayed with the maximum recommended dosage of 400.5 g a.i. ha<sup>-1</sup> boscalid and 100.5 g a.i. ha<sup>-1</sup> pyraclostrobin. The residues of pyraclostrobin and boscalid in garlic bulb and green garlic samples were determined using a mini-Luke multi-residue solvent extraction method paired with a high-performance liquid chromatography diode array detector (HPLC-DAD). This method is based on the extraction of a homogeneous sample with acetone, petroleum ether, and dichloromethane. Boscalid and pyraclostrobin recoveries in green garlic and garlic bulbs ranged from 71% to 107% on average, with a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 6.8% to 18.1%, and limits of quantification were 0.02 mg/kg. In green garlic and garlic bulbs, boscalid residues ranged from 0.14 to 3.51 mg/kg and pyraclostrobin from lower than LOQ to 1.43 mg/kg, during the experiment. The adjuvant increased the fungicidal efficacy of the fungicides and their retention on green garlic. Although boscalid is considered a nonsystemic fungicide, it showed higher translocation from garlic leaves to garlic bulbs than pyraclostrobin. Regarding the dietary risk assessment, the use of the adjuvant in a tank mixture with boscalid and pyraclostrobin is considered safe 14 days after application, which agrees with the recommended PHI.
57	Sustainable control stategies of the two-spotted mite Tetranychus urticae Koch (Prostigmata: Tetranychidae) in citrus	The two spotted mite is a key pest in Mediterranean citrus crops. This citrusagrosystem harbors a rich and abundant community of native predators that feed onTetranychus urticae. The groundcover vegetations also plays an important role in thepopulation regulation. However, recurrent outbreaks during summer lead to repetitive sprays to control its populations. During two consecutive years, a T. urticae control strategy based on conservation biological control and the use of paraffin oils was implemented in a commercial grove of Citrus clementina cv., Clementina de Nules grafted on Citrange Carrizo rootstock, located in southern Catalonia (Spain). No synthetic acaricides nor insecticides were sprayed during that period. A permanent groundcover was maintained and mowed regularly. The population dynamics of T. urticae and natural enemies in the tree canopies was monitored. The number of symptomatic or spotted leaves, T. urticae individuals per leaf, and the presence of natural enemies were recorded. From August onwards T. urticae population on fruits was also monitored. When the economic threshold was reached, paraffin oil was used to keep it under control. Two sprays during the first season and three during the second were conducted. At harvest, the symptoms caused by T. urticae on fruits were assessed. During the first season, only 1% of the fruits showed severe scarring and 12% showed small scars on the fruit rind. At harvest of the second season no fruits with severe scarring were recorded, showing the efficacy of the strategy followed.
58	Scientific-based drip irrigation regime for raspberry plants cultivated in the central part of the non-black earth region	Raspberry is an important berry crop; its production volumes increase from year to year. To produce high-quality planting material and gain high and stable yields under unstable weather conditions, resource-saving technologies, including drip irrigation, are required. The purpose of this study was to develop a scientific-based drip irrigation regime for raspberry plants cultivated in the central part of the non-Black Earth Region of Russia. A two-factor field experiment was launched in autumn 2019. The first factor (factor A) was the drip irrigation regime; the moisture content in the root layer was maintained in the following ranges: 60-80, 70-90, and 80-100% of the field moisture capacity (FMC). The second factor (factor B) was the raspberry variety: Nagrada or Solnyshko. Drip watering can substantially reduce irrigation water consumption. In the variant involving drip irrigation and moisture content in the root layer maintained in the range of 80-100% of the field moisture capacity, irrigation water savings averaged 65% compared to traditional watering techniques; in the variant involving drip irrigation and moisture content in the root layer maintained in the range of 60-80% FMC, water savings averaged 78%. In addition, local irrigation creates the optimal air and water regime in the soil. In experimental variants involving irrigation, precipitation accounted for the main part of the total water consumption (71-81%); while irrigation water for only 15-22%. In variants with soil moisture maintained at levels exceeding 70% FMC, the stem diameter in seedlings was 20-40% larger compared to the control, the height of seedlings was 40-50% larger, and the yield was twice as much as in the control variant. This makes it possible to recommend such irrigation regimes as optimal ones.
59	Regulation of yield, fruit size, and leaf mineral nutrients of the 'Sumadinka' sour cherry cultivar with help of rootstocks	The impact of seven clonal rootstocks (Colt, MaxMa 14, Krymsk 6, Adara, Cigancica, Gisela 5, and Gisela 6) and one local plum (Myrobalan seedlings) on yield, fruit weight, leaf mineral content at 120 days after full bloom (DAFB), and deviation from optimum percentage (DOP) for macro- and microelements of the 'Sumadinka' sour cherry cultivar was evaluated in orchard conditions for two consecutive years. Results showed that yield was higher on Adara, Gisela 5 and MaxMa 14, intermediate on Cigancica and Krymsk 6, and lower on Colt, Gisela 6, and Myrobalan rootstocks. The average fruit weight (FW) was highest on Gisela 6 and lowest on Myrobalan seedlings, and FW was higher in the second year of the trial. Significant effect of rootstock was found on the leaf mineral analysis properties evaluated. Thus, Adara showed the best capacity to uptake and translocate to the scion leaves for most macro- and microelements, whereas the poorest nutritional status was, in general, obtained for Myrobalan, probably due to the incidence of graft incompatibility disturbances with the 'Sumadinka' cultivar. MaxMa 14 showed the best balanced nutritional values (DOP) whereas the wider imbalance among elements was induced by Myrobalan seedlings. 'Krymsk 6' had, in general, lower values for most leaf mineral elements but higher DOP macro and DOP micro-indexes, showing more unbalanced nutritional index than the rest of rootstocks, with the exception of Myrobolan, and both of them followed by Colt. This work demonstrates that the rootstock strongly influences some important sour cherry attributes such as yield, fruit size, leaf macro- and microelements. The significant positive correlations between yield and mineral elements as Mn and Ca could indicate the interest of rootstocks having higher absorption and uptake for these elements in the present growing conditions. Considering their overall performance and tolerance to heavy and acidic soils, and according to the PCA results, Adara, MaxMa 14, and Gisela 6 appear as new promising rootstocks and can be recommended for sour cherries growing under similar soil conditions. We believe that sufficient information on the influence of different rootstocks on yield, fruit size, and leaf mineral composition of sour cherry would enable less ambiguous comparisons within and among them and ensure the best choice for growing a specific cultivar in similar environmental conditions.
60	Technological research of pneumoseparator for forest seed extraction	A technological study on the operation of a pneumatic separator on a BCC Cleaner&Seed Sizer (mini) machine for extraction of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) seeds has been carried out. It is part of the new technological equipment for greenhouse production of container seedlings in the Lokorsko forest nursery. Compared to the traditional production of saplings in Bulgaria for afforestation, the new production requires the extracted seeds to have higher quality indicators. In order to establish the optimal operating modes of the pneumoseparator for high quality seed production, with minimal seed losses in the waste in the aspiration system, a multifactor active experiment and optimization in the treatment of Scots pine seeds was conducted. The obtained results were used to establishment of a regression models to predict the technological parameters and the quality of the obtained seeds depending on the operating modes of the machine. The optimal parameters for setting the pneumatic separator have been established and functional modes for Scots pine seeds extraction have been determined.
61	Conservation of the bird cherry (Padus Mill.) germplasm by cold storage and cryopreservation of winter cuttings	Conservation at cryogenic temperatures, usually in liquid nitrogen (LN) or in its vapor, is the only reliable method for the long-term ex situ conservation of fruit and berry crops with vegetative reproduction. In this study, five bird cherry (Padus Mill.) varieties of different genetic origin from the bird cherry genebank at the N.I. Vavilov All-Russian Institute of Plant Genetic Resources (VIR, Russia) were tested for their response to cryopreservation in LN vapor (-183--185 degrees C). The response included viability under laboratory and field conditions, morphological assessment of the developed plants and biochemical analysis of fruits produced during three consecutive years by plants developed from cryopreserved cuttings. All parameters were compared to those recorded after cold storage of cuttings (-5 degrees C), a routine mid-term conservation method currently used at the VIR genebank. The initial viability of winter cuttings varied from 86.7% to 93.3%. Six-month cold storage and cryopreservation reduced viability to 53.3-86.7% and 43.3-60.0%, respectively, which was above the 40% viability threshold in all varieties tested. Cuttings after cold storage showed better viability when recovered in the laboratory (80% mean viability) than in the field (58% mean viability); viability of cryopreserved cuttings was not affected by recovery conditions. The results of a two-way analysis of covariance suggested that storage and recovery conditions had the most significant effect on viability (p < 0.0001), while the effects of genotype (p = 0.062) and factor interactions (p = 0.921) were minor. Cryopreservation had little or no influence on morphological parameters of the plants recovered in the field, including plant height, number of shoots, internodes and roots, and root length. Similarly, no effect of cryopreservation was recorded on dry matter content, total sugar content and ascorbic acid concentration in fruits produced by plants developed from the cryopreserved cuttings. These results suggest that cryopreservation in LN vapor is a reliable method for conservation of the bird cherry genetic collection and is worth testing with a broader variety of genotypes.
62	Influence of container, potting media and nutrients on production and post-production consumer acceptance of potted marigold (Tagetes patula L.)	Production of potted plants is influenced by factors viz., type of container, potting medium, nutrient dose. A study was conducted to standardize these factors for potted French marigold var. Arka Pari. The treatments comprised of two type of containers (plastic and coir), three potting media [red soil + FYM + sand (1:1:1 v/v), Arka fermented cocopeat (AFC), AFC + vermicompost (1:1 v/v)] and four nutrition concentrations (160:30:180 ppm N:P: K, 128:24:144 ppm N:P: K, 96:18:108 ppm N:P:K and 3% Jeevamrutha) laid out in factorial completely randomized design replicated thrice. Plants grown in potting media combination of Arka fermented cocopeat (AFC) + vermicompost (1:1 v/v) along with weekly application of nutrient solution (128:24:144 ppm NPK) produced maximum number of flowers plant<sup>-1</sup> (147.61) and registered highest uptake of nitrogen (2.87 g plant<sup>-1</sup>), phosphorus (0.53 g plant<sup>-1</sup>), potassium (3.24 g plant<sup>-1</sup>), magnesium (0.85 g plant<sup>-1</sup>) and sulphur (0.21 g plant<sup>-1</sup>). Based on the attributes of the potted plants, this treatment combination also registered the highest score (81.2 on a scale of 100), willingness of the consumers to purchase (4.5 on a scale of 5), overall acceptability (2.7 on a scale of 3) and the benefit cost ratio of 1.18.
63	Impact of intron and retransformation on transgene expression in leaf and fruit tissues of field-grown pear trees	Stable and high expression of introduced genes is a prerequisite for using transgenic trees. Transgene stacking enables combining several valuable traits, but repeated transformation increases the risk of unintended effects. This work studied the stability and intron-mediated enhancement of uidA gene expression in leaves and different anatomical parts of pear fruits during field trials over 14 years. The stability of reporter and herbicide resistance transgenes in retransformed pear plants, as well as possible unintended effects using high-throughput phenotyping tools, were also investigated. The activity of beta-glucuronidase (GUS) varied depending on the year, but silencing did not occur. The uidA gene was expressed to a maximum in seeds, slightly less in the peel and peduncles, and much less in the pulp of pear fruits. The intron in the uidA gene stably increased expression in leaves and fruits by approximately twofold. Retransformants with the bar gene showed long-term herbicide resistance and exhibited no consistent changes in leaf size and shape. The transgenic pear was used as rootstock and scion, but grafted plants showed no transport of the GUS protein through the graft in the greenhouse and field. This longest field trial of transgenic fruit trees demonstrates stable expression under varying environmental conditions, the expression-enhancing effect of intron and the absence of unintended effects in single- and double-transformed woody plants.
64	Comparison of leaf litter decomposition and microbial decomposer communities in fringe and riverine mangroves in French Guiana	Mangroves are highly productive and changing forests located in the intertidal zone of tropical regions. Leaf litter decomposition represents a substantial part of their carbon sink abilities. Little is known about the potential effect of climate change on this key process of ecosystem functioning. This study compared leaf litter microbial decay between fringe and riverine Avicennia germinans stands. A direct and reciprocal transplant experiment using litterbags was setup in French Guiana to test 3 hypotheses: (i) the activities and abundance of microbial decomposers are lowest in the fringe mangroves due to exposure to saline water and tidal immersion; (ii) for these reasons, litter decomposes faster in riverine stands; and (iii) according to the home-field advantage hypothesis, litter decomposes more rapidly in the environment from which it originates. Remaining litter masses, abundance of litter microbial community (phospholipid fatty acid signatures (PLFA)), and their functional capability (enzyme activities and Biolog) were assessed. Litter directly transplanted in riverine stands showed higher enzymatic activity (+ 77%), catabolic diversity (+ 10%), and microbial biomass (+ 60%) than litter transplanted directly in fringe stands. In contrast, both riverine and fringe derived litter showed faster decay at the fringe (14% mass loss) than riverine site (4% mass loss) between 30 and 45 days. Here, environmental conditions associated with different distances from the sea such as salinity and inundation regimes, rather than microbial features are suggested as main factors affecting decomposition process. Expected sea level rise in the coastal Guianas may therefore modify the mangroves productivity in the coming decades.
65	The post-registration monitoring of glyphosate-treated plants using anecic earthworms	Glyphosate N-(phosphonomethyl) glycine is a widely-used herbicide in agriculture. The anecic earthworm, Lumbricus terrestris feeds and forages for surface plant materials meaning that this species has a unique and direct exposure to agrichemicals. At the recommended product rates, significantly (F<sub>1,44</sub> = 8.67, p= .005) higher numbers of L. terrestris middens were found in the glyphosate treated areas of an arable crop field. Laboratory feeding assays using field aged plant materials indicated that previous glyphosate treatment was a statistically significant factor affecting earthworm L. terrestris biomass (F<sub>1</sub>,<sub>12</sub> = 5.75, p= .03). Negligible glyphosate residues were detectable, and the field aged plant materials were encrusted with fungal hyphae. This suggests that glyphosate influences the colonisation of plant material by a litter-fungus complex which improves the food quality to earthworms. Concentrations of epoxiconazole, a fungicide, were detected in some plant materials and may influence overall food quality to earthworms. Glyphosate treatment on fresh volunteer plant leaves (unwanted crop seedlings) was not a statistically significant factor affecting earthworm L. terrestris biomass (F<sub>1</sub>,<sub>6</sub> = 0.16, p= .92). These results indicate fungal communities influence feeding behaviours, and plant materials are a direct source of agrichemicals to anecic earthworms.
66	Production of compost from logging residues. (Special Issue: Bioprocesses and sustainable development (BSD-2023).)	The implementation of forest management generates logging residue which can be used in several ways. One of the option is to use of logging residue in the composting process. Therefore, this study determined the possibility of producing compost based on logging residue and the produced fertilizer used to fertilize forest nurseries. Pine chips and sewage sludge were used for carrying out the study. The compost, as well as the leachate produced during composting, were characterized by high NPK content. The leachate collected at the end of the experiment was characterized by nitrogen content of approximately 6500 mg.dm<sup>-3</sup>, phosphorus of approximately 450 mg.dm<sup>-3,</sup> and potassium of approximately 500-700 mg.dm<sup>-3</sup>. In contrast, the compost produced contained approximately 0.57 g.kg<sup>-1</sup> nitrogen, approximately 0.39 g.kg<sup>-1</sup> phosphorus, and approximately 0.24 g.kg<sup>-1</sup> potassium. The disadvantage in terms of the usefulness of the resulting fertilizer in forest nurseries is its pH, which exceeded 9.0.
67	Does shading and ground cover of moss and litter improve germination and establishment of Betula pendula Roth, Salix caprea L. and Populus tremula L. seedlings during drought stress in climate change? - a greenhouse study	The climate change is leading to a significant increase in temperatures and dry periods in spring, for example in parts of middle and north Europe. Thus, the important factor for tree growth, the water availability, decreases on forest sites. It is to be expected that the successful establishment of pioneer tree species as pre-forests on large damaged areas will considerable be limited in the future. The phases of germination and establishment are the most dangerous phase in the life of trees. In this greenhouse study, we tested how different microsite conditions (open soil, moss and litter cover as well as different shading) under reduced water availability influence establishment success and growth of Betula pendula, Populus tremula and Salix caprea. The initial high germination success were reduced to 14%, 7% and 12% for Populus tremula, Salix caprea and Betula pendula, respectively, and the growth were significantly slower when the relevant soil water resource was just above the permanent wilting point. Therefore, in the first year the germination and establishment is linked to persistent moist conditions. If the soil dries out during germination, e.g. if there is no watering for more than 3 weeks, all seedlings died. Equivalent germination microsites (shading or ground cover) with comparable possible seedling densities to the moist open soil does not exist under water stress. Although moss and litter cover retain longer soil moisture under extremely dry conditions and guarantee significantly better seedling development than on open soil, initially significantly fewer seeds germinate on these substrate types. Radiation shows no influence on germination and seedling survival. The seedlings are able to survive radiation conditions of 3% and 27% of open area radiation. This makes establishment possible under (remaining) light canopy, at the edge of damaged areas or in small islands of remaining shelter trees on damaged areas. However, radiation had a significant effect on growth. With increasing radiation, shoot lengths and above ground biomasses are higher and the root collar diameter larger. Overall, Betula pendula is the most drought stress resistant of the tested tree species. While Populus tremula and Salix caprea already had problems establishing themselves on dry sites, the problem will become more serious under climate change. The lack of moist, vegetation-free open soils will result in a significant reduction of establishment success for tested pioneer tree species in climate change.
68	Investigation of the effect of sowing time on one of the key crops of sustainable land use, the hairy vetch (Vicia villosa roth.): growth indicators and yield elements in Nyirseg region of east Hungary	Leguminous crops, whose species characteristics and agronomic values allow their incorporation into sand farming, are of great importance for the environmentally friendly utilization of the acidic sandy soils of Nyirseg. Among the legume cultivars that can be grown on acidic sandy soils, the hairy vetch is of outstanding importance, which is also been grown as green manure, green fodder, and seed, in Hungary, for more than a hundred years. Our observation aimed to examine, in a field micro-parcel experiment, at different sowing times, in six replicates, at three different recording periods, the plant height, the root length, the number of the Rhizobium root-nodules formed on the main and lateral roots, the number of seeds, the weight of the seeds, and the thousand kernel weight of the hairy vetch. From our experimental results, we found that the average height of the plants before the onset of winter, at the sowing time in late September, was between 11 and 18 cm, while the root length ranged from 16 to 26 cm. In the same phenophase (before winter) and sowing time, the highest number of Rhizobium nodules was measured on the main root (9.4-11.5), while the most efficient nodule formation on the lateral roots was in the budding period (13.7-27.6), also in the sowing time of September 20. In the studied years, the data on the number of pods per plant of hairy vetch showed an increasing trend with sowing time (5.6-12.2 pc/plant). The same increasing trend was observed for the number of seeds per plant (13.9-34.6 pc/plant). The highest seed weight (0.57-0.79 g) was obtained at the last sowing date. The results presented above also confirm that the cultivation of hairy vetch should become more and more important for sustainable land use.
69	Evaluation of Trichoderma spp. on Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. asparagi and Fusarium wilt control in asparagus crop	Among the key diseases affecting the asparagus crop (Asparagus officinalis L.), vascular wilting of asparagus caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. asparagi stands out worldwide. This disease significantly shortens the longevity of the crop and limits economic production. Traditional control measures have been largely ineffective, and chemical control methods are difficult to apply, making biological control approaches, specifically the use of Trichoderma, an economical, effective, and risk-free alternative. This study aimed to identify the main factors that affect the efficacy of biopesticides studied as Biological Control Agents (BCAs) against Fusarium wilt in asparagus and to assess the efficacy of Trichoderma-based biopesticides under greenhouse and semi-field conditions. We evaluated the response of three Trichoderma spp. (T. atroviride, T. asperellum, and T. saturnisporum) to environmental variables, such as temperature and water activity, and their antagonistic capacity against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. asparagi. All three Trichoderma species inhibited the growth of the pathogen in vitro. A decrease in water activity led to a greater reduction in the growth rate. The efficacy of the three biological control agents decreased with higher temperatures, resulting in minimal inhibition, particularly under conditions of restricted available water in the environment. The effect of the fungal inoculum density was also analyzed at two different temperatures. A direct correlation between the amount of inoculum and the score on the Disease Severity Index (DSI) was observed. A notable reduction in DSI was evident in treatments with high inoculum density (10<sup>6</sup> conidium/mL) for all three species of Trichoderma tested at both temperatures. In greenhouse and semi-field tests, we observed less disease control than expected, although T. asperellum and T. atroviride showed lower disease severity indices and increased the dry weight of seedlings and crowns, whereas T. saturnisporum resulted in the highest disease rate and lowest dry weight. This work highlights that the efficacy of Trichoderma as BCAs is influenced by various factors, including the quantity of soil inocula, and environmental conditions. The study findings have strong implications for selecting appropriate Trichoderma species for controlling specific pathogens under specific environmental conditions.
70	Development of a new micropropagation protocol and transfer of in vitro plants to in vivo conditions for cascade hop	The vegetative propagation of hops, despite being a reliable method, is not very common due to the unavailability of the plant material. In this study, the technique of in vitro propagation was applied to the Cascade variety of Humulus lupulus L. The plant material was collected from a private field in Sicily; the explants were subjected to sterilization before in vitro culture. Single-node explants were placed in in vitro culture in nine different culture media for multiplication. Thidiazuron (TDZ), Benzyladenine (BAP) and meta-Topoline (mT) were tested for multiplication phase. For the rooting phase, five types of different culture media were evaluated. Binodal cuttings coming from the previous multiplication test were placed in the culture. The rooting media differ from each other in the concentration and ratio of two auxin hormones: Indolo-3-acetic acid (IAA) and Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA). In vitro rooted plants obtained from the rooting phase were transferred to ex vitro conditions in a microbox with agri-perlite and a solution containing Murashige and Skoog (MS) basal medium at half concentration. With a culture medium containing the highest TDZ doses (H6) and combination with cytokinin (H8 and H9), the highest shoot percentage was obtained. After 3 months of in vitro culture, the highest shoot percentage was observed in the culture medium with 2 mL L<sup>-1</sup> of BAP. The highest rooting percentage, roots numbers and root length were found when the culture medium was supplemented with 1 mL L<sup>-1</sup> of IAA. The usage of agri-perlite and MS at half concentration, without PGR, allowed us to obtain a 99.1% survival rate. This micropropagation protocol is useful for obtaining virus-free plants and for the development of the brewery industry.
71	Tuber melanosporum drives the symbiosis with Castanea sativa seedlings under greenhouse conditions and high calcium levels	The sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa) could potentially be used as a host for the Perigord truffle (Tuber melanosporum) in multi-cropping plantations to promote rural or marginalized economies by providing farmers with a valuable source of income from both the truffle and the chestnut. Black truffles are known to associate to sweet chestnut trees in the wild. However, inoculation of chestnut seedlings with this highly appreciated edible fungus has not been attempted so far under greenhouse conditions. In this study, we tested the suitability of C. sativa as a host for T. melanosporum using a substrate containing high levels of active calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) to enhance truffle growth. We found that C. sativa seedlings can be successfully colonized by T. melanosporum in the nursery and that T. melanosporum appears to have a strong influence in its host's physiology, growth, and nutritional processes. The inoculated plants showed a greater root dry weight, water potential values and higher Ca<sup>2+</sup> content. Under these conditions and using a substrate containing limestone seems to favour the fungus in the mutualistic symbiosis.
72	The influence of some Capsicum rootstocks on bell pepper crops	Bell pepper has an important content of vitamins (C, A, E and B), minerals and sugar. It ranks the fourth place in Romania, after tomatoes, onions and cabbage. Grafted bell pepper crops from Romania obtain higher productions compared to nongrafted bell pepper crops. The objective of the paper has been to establish the effect of some Capsicum rootstocks on some Romanian and Dutch bell pepper cultivars obtained in 2019 in the greenhouse from HORTING Institute. The biological material consists of cultivars of Capsicum genus: two scions (Dutch 'Menta' F1 bell pepper and Romanian 'Regal' bell pepper) and three rootstocks (Romanian 'L11A' and 'L12S' bell peppers and Dutch first-generation 'Foundation' hybrid). Dutch 'Menta' bell pepper and Romanian 'Regal' bell pepper are commonly cultivated in fields, greenhouses, and solariums. There were studies in 6 grafted plant variants and 2 non-grafted plant variants of 36000 plants/ha. Grafting has influenced the yield and quality of bell pepper fruits. Grafting has positively or negatively influenced fruit yield and the content of biochemical compounds in grafted crops. The results of this research require an extension of the intra and interspecific grafting of the bell pepper, respectively into different rootstocks for the Romanian bell pepper crops from greenhouses, solariums, and fields.
73	Analysis of the association Galio rotundifolii-Abietetum albae Wraber (1955) 1959 on Manjaca Mt (NW Bosnia and Herzegovina)	This research aimed to study phytocoenological characteristics of a fir-dominated community on silicate substrate at the locality of Sitnica on Manjaca Mt, northwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina. This community originated from artificially forested mixed stands of fir and spruce planted in the habitat of the mountain Dinaric fir-beech forest, over a hundred years ago. With regular selective cuttings and natural regeneration, the structure shifted from even-aged to uneven-aged. In total, 18 phytocoenological releves were made using the Braun-Blanquet method during the vegetation seasons of 2021 and 2022. Releves were stored in Turboveg database. Ecological factors were calculated based on Ellenberg bioindicator values. Species composition was analyzed in terms of life form, geoelements and chorotypes. Our analysis indicates that collected releves can be classified as the association Galio rotundifolii-Abietetum albae belonging to the alliance Fagion sylvaticae.
74	Effect of nitrogen deposition on root systems and exudates of seedlings of beech Fagus sylvatica L. in a temperate climate	The purpose of this experiment was to determine the effect of deposition of different doses of nitrogen on the root systems of common beech Fagus sylvatica L. seedlings and their exudates. We tried to explain how different doses of nitrogen can affect the assimilation of nutrients necessary for seedling growth, as well as the morphology of fine roots. The experiment was conducted on a nursery at the Forest Experimental Station of the Agricultural University of Krakow. Three different nitrogen doses were used in the experiment: 0.75 kg.ha-1, 2.25 kg.ha-1, 4.5 kg.ha-1 and a control variant without nitrogen. The experiment was conducted from May to September 2021. Seedlings with their root systems and their secretions were taken twice, at the beginning and end of the experiment. The content of micro- and macro-nutrients was determined in the aboveand below-ground parts of the seedlings. In addition, the basic chemical properties and enzymatic activity of the substrate in which the seedlings grew were determined. In the study, we showed that a higher nitrogen dose influenced a higher amount of carbon released with exudates from fine roots, which was related to the overall root morphology. Higher specific root length (SRL) and specific root area (SRA) parameters showed a positive correlation with root exudates. In addition, a higher nitrogen dose had a positive effect on the nutritional status of the seedlings.
75	Morphological, molecular, and life cycle characteristics of Phaeocystis globosa Scherffel (Prymnesiophyceae) in the Southeast China sea	Phaeocystis globosa blooms frequently occur in the Southeast China Sea and cause significant negative impacts on coastal ecology and mariculture. The P. globosa blooms in southeastern China are very different compared to those of European strains, suggesting that differences may exist in their morphological, phylogenetic, and life history traits. In this study, seven strains of P. globosa isolated from Southeast China Sea that were typical strains of algal blooms in the region, in addition to one strain from the Gulf of Mexico (CCMP629), were comprehensively evaluated to better understand region-specific differences of the species. Significant differences were not observed in the internal cell structures and other characteristics compared to those of European strains, while differences in cell surface structures were apparent. For example, small and large flagellated Chinese P. globosa cells exhibited two flagella with slightly unequal lengths and a short haptonema, the surfaces of small flagellated cells were not covered by scales, and colony cell diameters were smaller. 18S rRNA sequence phylogenetic analysis also revealed that P. globosa comprised a species complex with two ecotypes (warm- and cold-water types), of which the strains from the southeastern coast of China and CCMP629 belonged to the warm-water type. In addition, the life cycles and variable modes of P. globosa colony formation were evaluated in detail. The algal bloom may be due to the rapid colonies formation by budding and colony fragments. These results provide new insights into the life cycle of P. globosa and highlight the differences in morphological and phylogenetic relationships between strains from the southeast coast of China and those from coastal European regions.
76	Ecological genetics of local adaptation in Arabidopsis: an 8-year field experiment	There is considerable evidence for local adaptation in nature, yet important questions remain regarding its genetic basis. How many loci are involved? What are their effect sizes? What is the relative importance of conditional neutrality versus genetic trade-offs? Here we address these questions in the self-pollinating, annual plant Arabidopsis thaliana. We used 400 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) derived from two locally adapted populations in Italy and Sweden, grew the RILs and parents at the parental locations, and mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) for mean fitness (fruits/seedling planted). We previously published results from the first 3 years of the study, and here add five additional years, providing a unique opportunity to assess how temporal variation in selection might affect QTL detection and classification. We found 10 adaptive and one maladaptive QTL in Italy, and six adaptive and four maladaptive QTL in Sweden. The discovery of maladaptive QTL at both sites suggests that even locally adapted populations are not always at their genotypic optimum. Mean effect sizes for adaptive QTL, 0.97 and 0.55 fruits in Italy and Sweden, respectively, were large relative to the mean fitness of the RILs (approximately 8 fruits/seedling planted at both sites). Both genetic trade-offs (four cases) and conditional neutrality (seven cases) contribute to local adaptation in this system. The 8-year dataset provided greater power to detect QTL and to estimate their locations compared to our previous 3-year study, identifying one new genetic trade-off and resolving one genetic trade-off into two conditionally adaptive QTL.
77	Development of an automated ion-specific fertigation management system	Vertical farming is a revolutionary idea that would allow cities a greater self-sufficiency by growing plants locally with maximum productivity. This technique responds to the challenges posed by the projected decreasing farmland availability, growing population and increased urbanization. A strong growth of vertical farming can be expected for the next decade. A crucial advantage of vertical farming over conventional farming is the more efficient control of all cultivation parameters like climate condition or nutrient concentrations as well as the recovery of water. Hydroponic, aeroponic and aquaponic culture are important technologies involved in vertical farming to grow value plant based raw materials, vegetables, flowers, herbs, selected fruits, seedlings, and fish year-round. Currently nutrient solution management is limited to adjusting the conductivity and pH of the solution by supplying stock solutions with fixed ion ratios. Ion specific nutrient management, based on ion selective electrodes (ISE) holds the potential to increase nutrient use efficiency and yields through continuous monitoring and adjustment of ion concentrations. In an Indo-German research project an automated sensor system for a highly efficient nutrient management in vertical farms shall be developed (SensVert). The main goal of the SensVert project is to develop an automated ion-specific fertigation management (ISFM) for vertical farming systems. Based on a better understanding of the plant-environment-interactions, optimized strategies for nutrient supply can be developed.
78	Pest categorisation of Setoptus parviflorae	The EFSA Plant Health Panel performed a pest categorisation of Setoptus parviflorae (Acari: Eriophyoidea: Phytoptidae) for the European Union (EU). This mite is not listed in Annex II of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072. It is known to occur in the Nanjing Botanical Garden (China) on Pinus parviflora. This is its only known host plant and location. The mite occurs on the needles and in the needle sheaths. Details about its life cycle are mostly unknown. Plants for planting, including dwarfed plants, of P. parviflora are the main potential pathway for entry into the EU. However, plants of the genus Pinus other than fruit and seeds are mostly prohibited from entering the EU (Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072). The host, P. parviflora, can be found in temperate-zone gardens and arboreta, and is a popular tree for bonsai in the EU. Although the Koppen-Geiger climate type Cfa (humid subtropical), which occurs in Nanjing, can be found in the EU, the growing conditions of P. parviflora at the Nanjing Botanical Garden were not reported. This adds uncertainty about where in the EU this mite could establish, most probably on ornamental P. parviflora. There is no evidence of impact of S. parviflorae. Measures to prevent entry and spread are available. S. parviflorae does not satisfy all the criteria that are within the remit of EFSA to assess for it to be regarded as a potential Union quarantine pest, as there is no evidence of impact.
79	Breeding in European pear (Pyrus communis) for red-skinned and red-fleshed fruit - the red-skinned gene C affects tree habit and flowering	The pear breeding programme at INRAE Angers-Beaucouze is partly devoted to screen for red-skinned fruit from mutants derived from European pear cultivars. These mutants were selected around 1950 in the USA from 'Doyenne du Comice', 'Bartlett' and 'Beurre Hardy'. Several combinations involving these red mutants and also cultivars such as 'Lombacad' and 'Red Satin' were studied for the inheritance of red leaves in the greenhouse and red-skinned fruit in the field. A single dominant gene (already named C/c) codes for red leaves and fruit skin in these different progenies. In the present study, the focus was evaluating vigour, tree habit and flowering time of field planted progenies. The traits were determined and compared between the segregants (C/C, C/c, c/c). The deep-red seedlings (C/C) have a columnar habit with some weak feathers and their flowering in the field is late compared to the other segregants (C/c and c/c). Our results highlight a pleiotropic effect of gene C on tree habit and flowering time. The other part of this breeding programme is related to red-fleshed pears. Progenies from the cultivar 'Sanguine d'Italie' were evaluated for this character. A single dominant gene (called F/f), independent from C/c, was found to control this character. In the greenhouse the red colour of the hypocotyls is a very accurate marker for the red-fleshed fruit hybrids screened in the field. An improved knowledge of the genetic basis of production and accumulation of red pigments in the fruit flesh will better support the pear breeding programmes aimed to select new pear cultivars carrying this attractive trait.
80	Study of some physiological parameters in the plum cultivars 'Jojo' and 'Topgigant Plus' (Prunus domestica L.), grafted on the clonal rootstock 'Docera 6' (P. domestica x P. cerasifera)	"The seed generations of the species Prunus cerasifera Ehrh., are used as a standard rootstock for plums in Bulgaria. The new clonal rootstock 'Docera 6' (P. domestica x P. cerasifera) attracts the attention of breeders and fruit growers in countries like Bulgaria, where Plum pox virus (PPV) is endemic. The current study was conducted in an experimental orchard at the Fruit Growing Institute - Plovdiv, Bulgaria planted in 2016. The study aimed to investigate some physiological parameters of the plum cultivars 'Jojo' and 'Topgigant Plus' (P. domestica) grafted on 'Docera 6'. The same cultivars grafted on the standard seedling rootstock Prunus cerasifera Ehrh. were used as control. In 2021, during two phenological stages, ""fruits about half final size"" (BBCH 75) and ""fruit ripe for picking"" (BBCH 87), the following indicators were determined: annual shoot length and thickness, number of leaves, fresh, dry mass and leaf area, content of photosynthetic pigments and total soluble proteins, as well as chlorophyll fluorescence (JIP test). For both studied cultivars, the length and diameter of the annual shoots were smaller in comparison with those grafted on 'P. cerasifera', although statistically, the difference was significant only for 'Jojo'. During both phenophases there was no significant difference in the content of photosynthetic pigments in both cultivars grafted on the two rootstocks. The results of the chlorophyll fluorescence analysis showed that the maximum quantum yield (Yield=Fv/Fm), reflecting the photochemical activity potential of Photosystem II, varied between 0.839 and 0.845 in all studied variants, which corresponds to healthy, unstressed leaves. For the parameters of the chlorophyll fluorescence (JIP test) in the cultivar 'Jojo'. differences between the two rootstocks and during the two phenophases were reported, while in the 'Topgigant Plus' cultivar they were observed only during fruit ripening."
81	11-year survey of yield and fruit quality of blood orange as affected by rootstock	The use of the rootstock in fruit tree crops has a pivotal role for plant performance, yield and quality traits. For decades, sour orange (Citrus aurantium L.) has been widely used in the Mediterranean citrus industry due to its high tolerance to several biotic and abiotic constraints. The spread in the 2000s of Citrus tristeza virus (CTV) in Italy, severely affecting the graft combination with sour orange, imposed the evaluation of CTV-tolerant alternative rootstocks. In particular, the aim of this study was to observe in a long-term period the influence of eight rootstocks on vegetative, yield and fruit quality of 'Tarocco Scire' pigmented sweet orange, highly valuable for the Italian citrus industry. The experimental field included different Poncirus-derived intergeneric hybrids and was established in 2010 in Catania Plain. The novel rootstocks evaluated were: Bitters, Carpenter, Furr (hybrids of Sunki mandarin and Swingle trifoliate orange), F6P12R and F6P13 (hybrids of Citrus latipes and Poncirus trifoliata) and C35 citrange, while Carrizo citrange and Swingle citrumelo were included as reference. The study allowed to decipher the effect of the different rootstocks in affecting vegetative, productive, and qualitative features of Tarocco Scire and evidenced that pedological conditions can be a limiting factor in the choice of the most suitable rootstock. Bitters showed a remarkable reduction of the canopy size, nevertheless being very productive. Overall, C35 and Furr had the highest cumulative yield in the 11-year investigation. Furthermore, anthocyanin content was different depending on the rootstock, with Bitters showing the highest pigmentation of the pulp.
82	Cover crops and rootstocks interaction on vine performances of organic 'Autumn Pearl' table grape: first results of OLTRE.BIO research project	Inter-row cover crops in organic viticulture are oriented to increase the biodiversity of soil and to promote healthy root status. The use of rootstocks on table grape cultivars is required due to phylloxera, nematodes, or soil difficulties, like high lime or salt content, drought and high groundwater conditions. The research was carried out in the Apulia region, in 2021 to determine the impact of two rootstocks (1103 Paulsen and 140 Ruggeri) on-field performance of organic 'Autumn Pearl' seedless vines grown on two different cover crops. The first one was a commercial mixture of grass cover and the second one a commercial grass-legume cover crop. 'Autumn Pearl' vines have shown the highest berry weight, equatorial diameter, and total soluble solid onto 140 Ruggeri and on grass cover crop. According to our data, grapevines onto 140 Ruggeri rootstock exhibited the highest photosynthetic assimilation rate and leaf transpiration. The use of inter-row cover crops (permanent or temporary) in viticulture has many advantages, of which the reduction of water runoff and soil erosion, restriction of evaporation from the soil surface, improvement of soil water holding and soil organic matter, the reduction of temperature fluctuations in the soil, as well as the regulation of the vine growth and vigor, with influence on table grape quality and quantity.
83	Drought stress affects productivity and fruit size of new apple cultivars	Growing apples in some regions may be restricted due to drought since the apple is a crop sensitive to drought stress. It is necessary to supply enough water in orchards during the critical period, more specifically during the development of the fruit. Otherwise, the lack of water would result in a reduced yield. To ensure fruit quality and yield, it is better to prevent drought by irrigation. However, water is not an unlimited resource. Therefore, this work deals with the evaluation of the production of several apple cultivars under reduced water supply. Growth and yield parameters were evaluated in 14 apple cultivars with 'Golden Delicious' used as a control. Trees were grafted on M 9 rootstock and planted at a density of 2272 trees ha<sup>-1</sup> in Eastern Bohemia (Czech Republic) in 2014. The trees were left without an irrigation system. The date of flowering was recorded for each single tree and the girt of trunk was measured at the end of the vegetation to determine the trunk cross-sectional area at height of 0.6 m. Fully matured fruits of each cultivar were harvested. The total yield of each tree was recorded, the specific productivity was calculated, and the fruits were divided in 4 size factions (<65 mm, 65-75 mm, 75-85 mm, >85 mm). Cumulative yields in apples 'Topaz', 'Artiga', 'Flordika', 'Frosta', 'Reluga', 'Gala', and 'Rucla' were significantly higher compared to LSQUOGolden DeliciousRSQUO. These cultivars appeared to be better suited for growing upon conditions of absent supplemental irrigation.
84	Thalia dealbata, a new host of sugarcane mosaic virus	Thalia dealbata is a native of the middle-southern part of the USA. It is a popular rhizomatous perennial pond plant which is available worldwide through wholesale nurseries. In 2021 at a nursery in Helvecia (Hungary) 1.5% of the 200 T. dealbata plants showed chlorotic bands on the foliage in August, which indicated a potential virus infection. By the end of the growing season, the disease incidence reached 100%. The causal pathogen was isolated and identified as Sugarcane mosaic virus (SCMV) based on serological and molecular analyses. This is thought to be the first report of SCMV infecting T. dealbata, a perennial herbaceous ornamental aquatic plant.
85	Agronomic evaluation of eight 41 B x 110 richter grapevine genotypes as rootstock candidates for Mediterranean viticulture	Choosing the most appropriate rootstock(s) is a key decision for the profitability of vineyards; therefore, there must be a sufficient range of rootstocks in the market adapted to different environmental conditions and production objectives. However, rootstock-breeding programs have been scarce in recent decades, and most of the rootstocks used today were bred a century ago, when the needs of the sector were very different from today. In this work, we aimed to evaluate new rootstock candidates before their introduction in the market. An agronomic evaluation was conducted on eight novel rootstock genotypes obtained from the first generation of the cross-pollination of 41 B Millardet et de Grasset (41 B) and 110 Richter (110 R) grafted with 'Syrah' and 'Tempranillo' and planted in a typical vineyard of the Ebro Valley in Spain. During the four consecutive growing seasons (2016-2019), growth, yield and berry composition parameters at harvest were collected. A linear mixed-effects model was constructed, considering year and block as random effects. Multiple factor analysis and hierarchical clustering on principal components were performed to establish clusters of genotypes with similar behaviour. The rootstock candidates showed a very wide performance range compared to their parents. The trial allowed us to identify two very promising candidates (RG8 and RG10), whose registration as commercial rootstocks is already in progress.
86	Corema album: from the wild to the field	Corema album (L.) D. Don a long-lived, dioecious evergreen shrub is native from Atlantic dunes in the Iberian Peninsula and produces white edible berries. As a new berry there is great interest in the production and marketing of its fruits. Accompanying this growing interest in the species, INIAV initiated the development of a research program with several lines that are underway. The relationship between fruit and seed size is one of the most important selection criteria in this species. Some studies of plant morphology and anatomy, namely flower biology were performed. Being a plant that inhabits dunes with extreme temperature conditions and lack of water in the summer period, it is expected that the germination of their seeds is difficult. Thus, several germination trials have been developed with different types of scarification and stratification with uneven results obtained. In order to understand embryo maturity and seed dormancy, histological sections of embryos were done during the stages of seed and cotyledon development. A germplasm collection from ten origins was established at INIAV Experimental farm at Fataca. To evaluate the phenological behaviour of plants from different origins, a phenological BBCH scale was proposed. Vegetative propagation tests were also carried out, assessing rooting capacity between different genotypes of distinct origins. Genetic diversity assessment based on ISSR markers and agro-morphological traits was done in four different sites along the Portuguese coast. Results show that genetic diversity was higher between populations than within them. The agro-morphological traits showed high diversity, but they were not associated to geographic localization. The opportunity for development of a new berry crop presents many potential benefits as well as new challenges. Mass selection of wild plants was performed in 5 km at Meco coastal dune with special focus on fruit characteristics, mainly fruit and seed size, with the selection of 20 superior clones. Corema album has great potential as a new berry crop for.
87	"""Recovery"" of Vaccinium myrtillus from phytoplasma infection in vitro"	"Consumer interest in healthy foods has increased market demand for high quality fruits such as wild and cultivated blueberries. They are used as medicinal plants, due to their high anthocyanin content and are an excellent source of antioxidants. Berries and leaves have various health effects and are used as a disinfectant, to lower cholesterol levels and as treatment for rheumatic diseases. In vitro techniques like micropropagation are increasingly being used as alternative ways of breeding, for the production of large numbers of plants on a commercial scale, for sanitation purposes and for the maintenance of obligate plant pathogens like viruses and phytoplasmas. A plant of wild European blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) exhibiting symptoms of shoot proliferation and small leaves was potted in the greenhouse and served as donor material for tissue culture establishment. Infected cultures were maintained over a period of more than 10 years and regularly screened for the presence of phytoplasmas. Interestingly over a period of several years a phenomenon of spontaneous remission of symptoms occurred, comparable to several cases of fruit trees under in vivo conditions described as ""recovery"". A thorough screening by PCR was carried out over several years and revealed that a spontaneous sanitation that occurred during the in vitro cultivation process, comparable to NDASH but with a lower extent (percentage) meristem culture and thermotherapy."
88	Adaptation to cultivation of Hypericum pubescens Boiss., an endangered species in Alentejo (Portugal)	Hypericum pubescens Boiss. is a medicinal plant, classified as endangered species, in the Portuguese red list of vascular flora, mainly due to the intensification of agriculture. This species is widely used in traditional medicine, increasing genetic erosion risk. Thus, studying propagation methods for its efficient cultivation is our main goal. Three seed samples were tested: (a) cultivated in 2016; (b) from nature in 2017; (c) cultivated in 2021. Seed were incubated at 20 degrees C, 12h photoperiod, using 4 replicates. In November 2021, a propagation trial was done using 30 stem cuttings (5 cm length) of four types of cuttings: softwood terminal; softwood sub-terminal; semi-softwood and hardwood. Cuttings were placed in a 5x5 cm cells on trays, using a commercial turf grass substrate. Cuttings rooting success and height was registered after 1 and 2 months. In May 2021, rooted stem cuttings from spontaneous plants were installed in an experimental field, using weed control fabric, constituted by 3 randomized blocks (5 plants block<sup>-1</sup>). Phenology descriptors (flowering dates: beginning, full, end) were observed. In November 2021, agronomic descriptors were observed: plot area, plot biomass production and main stem descriptors (height, length, number of internodes, number of ramifications and biomass production). The germination capacity was maintained after 5 years' storage in a refrigerator (ca. 5 degrees C). Best seed germination rate was 86%; 1000 seed weight was 0.084 g. The highest survival rate was obtained with sub-terminal cuttings (100%), but softwood terminal cuttings grew faster. On the agronomic plot, average height of plants was 21.9 cm, stem average length was 66.1 cm, thus, plants have prostrate habit; main stems had average of 67 ramifications and 45 internodes. The 4.6 m<sup>2</sup> plot produced 862.2 g m<sup>-2</sup> fresh herb and 1.73 t ha<sup>-1</sup> dry herb. Plants were vigorous and cultivation installation using weed control fabric was considered a success.
89	Aromatic and medicinal plants gene pool from the VIR collection: diversity and potential	The VIR (N.I. Vavilov All-Russian Research Institute of Plant Genetic Resources, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation) world collection of aromatic and medicinal plants includes about 4500 accessions from 90 countries of various status, which belong to 19 families, 71 genera and 170 species. The most widely represented families are Lamiaceae (27%), Asteraceae (15%), Polygonaceae (14%), Apiaceae (11%), and Brassicaceae (10%). The largest collections are collections of sorrel (485 accessions), basil (436 acc.), okra (390 acc.), endive (323 acc.), garden cress (325 acc.), fennel (245 acc.), asparagus (166 acc.), mint (128 acc.), savory (120 acc.) and salvia (107 acc.). The VIR is deeply studying such crops as basil, garden cress, arugula, artichoke, chicory, mint, vegetable chrysanthemum and Malabar spinach and analyses morphological, phenological, economically valuable and biochemical characteristics of the accessions. The main directions in which the study and breeding is carried out are earliness, including in connection with the advancement of southern crops to the north, productivity, resistance to early bolting, resistance to biotic and abiotic stressors, decorativeness, suitability for various cultivation methods, including in pot culture and intensive light culture. Studies of the biochemical composition of all crops are aimed at determining the content of dry matter, sugars, ascorbic acid, chlorophylls and carotenoids, anthocyanins, phenolic compounds and amino acids. Also, accessions of mint are studied for the content of essential oils, chicory root and artichoke for the content of inulin. The obtained phenotypic and biochemical data are used to create trait collections. The collection is screened annually to identify both new phenotypes for individual traits and for combinations of already known traits. In recent years, there has been an intensive replenishment of the collection, with special attention paid to medicinal plants. Now VIR collection includes among others the accessions of valuable plants such as althaea (Althaea officinalis L.), arnica (Arnica montana L.), elecampane (Inula helenium L.), sagebrush (Artemisia L.), tutsan (Hypericum L.), European gromwell (Lithospermum officinale L.), polemonium (Polemonium caeruleum L.) and anthyllis (Anthyllis L).
90	Mycobiome of post-agricultural soils 20 years after application of organic substrates and planting of pine seedlings	A 20-year study of a pine stand on post-agricultural land showed that woody debris in the form of organic matter can be successfully used to restore symbiotic mycorrhizal communities, as is the case with forest soils. Woody substrates restored organic matter in soils altered by long agricultural use and had a positive effect on the composition of mycobiota antagonistic to pathogens, especially to Heterobasidion annosum, the causal agent of the dangerous disease root and stump rot of many forest tree species, including stands of Pinus sylvestris (L.). In a study that started in 2001 in the forest district of Czarne Czluchowskie (northern Poland), the following organic materials were used: wood residues (W), sawdust (S), bark compost (B), and compost applied to the root zone during planting (G). The organic materials were spread in the form of mulch over the entire area during planting. After twenty years, it was found that the substrates used provided suitable growth conditions for mycobiome useful for pines. The addition of organic matter did not change the alpha biodiversity of the soil, but in the long term led to significant changes in the composition of mycobiota (beta biodiversity). The changes in the soil after the addition of organic material naturally accelerated the formation of the forest habitat. A number of fungi evolved that degraded added lignin and cellulose while being antagonists of H. annosum and other pine pathogens. In particular, the well-known hyperpathogens of the genus Trichoderma played an important role by promoting resistance of the soil environment to pathogens. Soil enrichment by bark compost and wood residues increased the relative abundance of Trichoderma more than fourfold. Mycorrhizal fungi became dominant in soil enriched with organic matter. After enriching the soil with bark compost, the relative abundance of Amphinema and Inocybe increased to 5%. The relative abundance of Russula in soil enriched with wood residues and sawdust increased to 9% and 5%, respectively. Mycorrhizal fungi, e.g., of the genus Amanita, Rusula, which formed root mycorrhizae, not only increased the root receiving area many times over, but also protected the roots (mechanically and chemically from pathogens). Altogether, the observed positive changes increase the chances that the first generation of pines will survive on the ground.
91	Future fire risk and the greenhouse gas mitigation potential of forest rehabilitation in British Columbia, Canada	Increased forest fires in the future will create opportunities to undertake salvage logging and replanting activities with the potential to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions relative to a 'do nothing' scenario that relies on natural regeneration. Salvage logging of fire-killed wood will generate additional useful products for society while replanting will provide opportunities to establish seedlings with genetic gain and increased climate resilience. In British Columbia, Canada, our study showed that cumulative net GHG benefit from these rehabilitation activities on about 14% of the area burned ranges from -32 to -79 MtCO<sub>2</sub>e in 2070, but cumulative net GHG reduction benefits are not realized for 23 to 31 years due to the emissions debt that is incurred from harvest wood product emissions and residue management. Scenarios were modelled using the Generic Carbon Budget Model (GCBM) that tracked carbon in the forest and a harvested wood products model that tracked the fate of C and the substitution benefits achieved through wood use, both developed by the Canadian Forest Service. Results were evaluated across 100 simulations of future fire, developed using a log-normal model fit to historic fire events and an assumption of linearly increased area annually burned by 2070 to double the average of the period 1950 to 2018. Our results suggest that mitigation efforts might be better directed at reducing wildfire risks and emissions in the first place, rather than rehabilitating post-fire outcomes.
92	Evaluation of the impact of Gleditsia triacanthos seed treatment methods on reproduction	Representatives of the genus Gleditsia, valuable trees for agroforestry in the south-east of the European part of Russia, form productive forest strips. In regions with difficult soil and climatic conditions, good plant development at the initial stage is important. The introduced species Gleditsia triacanthos has characterized by a high degree of drought resistance and stable fruiting. The main source material for reproduction is seeds, but the structural features of the seed coat affect the germination and development of Gleditsia seedlings. The aim was to assess the impact of processing methods on the dormancy of seeds with a hard shell and the growth of seedlings. Under laboratory conditions at the Federal Scientific Center of Agroecology of the Russian Academy of Sciences in the period from November 17 to December 1, 2022, an experiment was conducted to study the effect of methods of treatment of seeds of Gleditsia triacantha (2022 year of fruit harvest). It has been established that the chemical method (H2SO4 concentration 95.72%, density 1.895 g/cm3, 1757 g/l) is more effective, because swelling (after 24 h-96%) and the appearance of hypocotyl (after 72 h-39.7%) in seeds and other phases of seedling formation of Gleditsia triacanthos. The recommended methods of seed pretreatment ensured mass sprouts (76-78% on day 7) and increased the yield of seedlings (55.0-61.5%). Research findings contribute to the search for techniques and methods for the development of low-carbon production technologies.
93	Culture of Gracilaria gracilis and Chondracanthus teedei from vegetative fragments in the field and carpospores in laboratory	Gracilarioids and Gigartinales are of great economic importance due to the phycocolloids they contain in their cell wall and are used in different industries worldwide. Field and laboratory cultures of two species of red seaweeds (Gracilaria gracilis and Chondracanthus teedei), confirmed after DNA analysis, were carried out to foster the increasing use of this species in Spain as a food source. Vegetative cultures carried out in an open-lock gate within a traditional salina in the ay of Cadiz (Southern Spain) rendered maximum growth rates in April (3.64% day<sup>-1</sup>) for G. gracilis and in November (4.68% day<sup>-1</sup>) for C. teedei, the latter showing significant differences between the months of the year. For laboratory cultures, samples of the two species used for sporulation were obtained from tidal creeks in several nearby locations of the Bay. In order to grow fertile carposporophytes from spores, Provasoli enriched seawater medium (ES medium), Miquel A + B and f/2 were used as culture medium at a temperature of 18 degrees C and irradiance of 30 micro mol m<sup>-2</sup> s<sup>-1</sup> in 12:12 h photoperiod. Both species developed a basal disc after 12-15 days in ES medium and Miquel A + B, and new microscopic seedlings were observed at 20-25 days in ES medium. With f/2 medium, no growth was observed after sporulation. The life cycle of G. gracilis was completed in ES medium over a period of 11 months with a mean growth rate of 3.28% day<sup>-1</sup>. The present study is an important step towards the development of seaweed cultivation in the Bay of Cadiz, especially in integrated multi-trophic cultivation in salinas as part of the more sustainable use of the marine resources in coastal communities.
94	Influence of the climatic conditions of the year 2022 on the grapevine phenology at SCDVV Blaj	The present article attempts to describe how the effects of climate conditions affect the evolution of the grapevine phenological period in 2022. The cultivars used were Selena, Blasius, Rubin, Radames and two clones obtained approved in SCDVV Blaj: Sauvignon blanc 9Bl and Feteasca alba 29 Bl. The experiment was carried out at SCDVV Blaj and included field observations, monitoring weather conditions such as temperature and precipitation. For the onset of the phenological phases: budding, flowering, veraison (colour change of grape berries) and ripening-maturation. The phenological phases of the grapevines were monitored for a growing season according to the protocol established, taking into account the BBCH grade. Temperature and precipitation are the two main climatic factors that affect the growth and development of the grapevines. Due to existing thermal conditions and continued global warming, the Tarnave vineyard region is a recommended place for white grape cultivation.
95	Observations on the effects of the Hail on some apple varieties under the conditions of 2021	The research was carried out on 3 apple varieties, namely Golden delicious, Jonathan and Starkrimson, grown in the N-E area of Romania, within the Research Station for fruit growing Iasi, on Falticeni development center. The plantation was established in 1990, being in 31 since planting. The trees are grafted on the MM106 rootstock, with a planting distance of 4 meters between rows and 2.5 meters between trees, with a density of 1000 trees/ha. During the agricultural year 2021, hail was observed as an extreme climatic phenomenon, recorded in June, July and August, when the trees were in the phenological stage BBCH 71-74, BBCH 75, BBCH 77 and BBCH 79. Extreme phenomena were accompanied by heavy rains and storms that affected both the quality and quantity of fruit production. The highest degree of damage was recorded in the Golden delicious variety in all four hail falls, with a percentage between 5% and 67%. Therefore, the fruit production was affected, their quality being impaired and not being commercialized as high quality fruit, for fresh consumption, but only industrialized.
96	Recovery and genotyping ancient Sicilian monumental olive trees	"The long-lived and evergreen olive tree dominates the Mediterranean landscape, representing an agroecological and cultural symbol and a genetic heritage of inestimable value. Sicily, for historical, geographical, and cultural reasons, has a very rich and distinctive olive germplasm. In this work, a large survey was conducted to discover, collect, and characterize the genetic diversity of centennial monumental olive trees from historical sites, such as the Greek Temple Valley (Agrigento), ancient gardens, or farmland present in the western part of the island. Trees were chosen based on their height, trunk, stump size, and presumed age; particularly, only olive trees with an age estimated at more than 400 years old were taken into consideration. For the morphological characterization, the leaf, fruit, and endocarp traits were analyzed. For the molecular characterization, 11 polymorphic microsatellite markers largely used for fingerprinting analysis were used. Reference cultivars were included in the analysis for comparison. Nuclear DNA was extracted from different parts of the plant (young leaves of shoots taken from the canopy and young leaves taken from suckers, which arose from the basal part of the tree) to check if the trees were grafted and to explore their diversity. Most of the monumental trees have been grafted at least one time during their long life, and some genotypes showed unique genetic profiles combined with peculiar phenotypic traits. Suckers (rootstock of the trees) showed a strict genetic relationship with an ancient monumental oleaster tree, also included in the study. ""Patriarch"" (original mother plants) trees of local cultivars were also identified. This research revealed a high level of the still unexplored genetic diversity of the Sicilian olive germplasm and highlighted its importance as a gene reservoir, which could support new breeding programs for the evaluation and possible selection of traits linked to putative resilience to abiotic and biotic stresses (particularly <i>Xylella fastidiosa</i> subsp. pauca ST53 or soil- borne diseases or insects). The results will be useful for improving the conservation process, enriching existing collections of olive genetic resources, and supporting on-farm conservation projects."
97	Signs of qualitative variability of seeds of Lonicera gracilipes var. Glandulosa Maxim. under influence with ionizing radiation	The article deals with the study of the biological characteristics of L. gracilipes Mig var. glanduiosa Maxim as a new berry crop. Seeds were treated with ionizing radiation to obtain new forms of crop plants. The identified number of qualitative signs of variability in seedlings exposed to ionizing radiation allows us to preliminarily speak about the identified mutations in L. gracilipes. The resulting mutant forms of the species L. gracilipes with other biological indicators to varying degrees different from the original species make it possible in the future to isolate promising forms valuable from an economic point of view for domestic berry growing. The currently existing economic indicators of the species L. gracilipes in terms of frost resistance (limit -250C), fruit weight - 0.6 g, low productivity (up to 300 g from one bush), put forward specific tasks for the selection of a new rare crop, promising for its cultivation as a fastgrowing berry bush.
98	The effect of the drug bio root plus on the yield and quality of root-related seedlings when propagated by shortened lignified	"The materials and results of research on the use of Bio Root Plus, produced in France, the effect of which has not been studied in the cultivation of grape seedlings, are presented. For the first time, the degree of influence of the drug on the regenerative activity of shortened grape cuttings was established with the industrial technology of growing seedlings using mulching polyethylene film and drip irrigation in the school. The regulations for the use of Bio Root Plus have been developed. The main research was carried out in the conditions of LLC ""Agrovin - Sultan"" of the Shelkovsky district of the Chechen Republic. The most developed root system in seedlings is formed when the cuttings are treated with Bio Root Plus at a concentration of 0.5%. In this variant, the best results were obtained in terms of growth - 100.7 cm versus 69.7 cm in the control. The ripening of shoots at the same time was 90.3%, and in the control only 70%. The leaf surface area was noted in this variant of 1200 cm2, which is 234 cm2 more than the control and 88 cm2 more than when treated with heteroauxin. The highest yield of seedlings of 385 pieces per 1 hectare was obtained when Bio Root Plus was processed at a concentration of 0.5%, which is more than when used in the production of heteroauxin by 13,000 pieces. The highest profitability - 317.9% was obtained in the same variant, and 64.1% less when treated with heteroauxin. The conducted studies allow us to recommend the preparation of Bio Root Plus in a concentration of 0.5% in the production of root-related seedlings."
99	Influence of modern technologies on the formation of cultivated cherry varieties, in temperate climates	The present article is devoted to the study of foreign cherry varieties on different rootstocks. Of all stone fruit crops, the most common is cherry. Cherry fruits are particularly valuable products, which have not only nutritional but also medicinal properties. The diversity of cherry varieties, determined by their morphological features, used as a means of production in certain natural and economic conditions. In this connection, in the ecological zone of our region, a comprehensive assessment of the biological features of different varieties of cherry trees of world selection is given. The influence of modern technologies on the formation of the crown and fruit, as well as the condition of the seedling as a whole, has been studied. The value of the studied traits lies in the characterization of biometric indicators affecting the aboveground elements of fruit trees and the general economic evaluation of cultivated varieties of sweet cherry, in temperate climatic conditions.
100	Fertility and yield of introduced apple varieties on different rootstocks under conditions of chechnya	In the present article the effect of dwarf clonal rootstock MM-106, M-9, M-26 on introduced apple-tree varieties was studied. With the identified specificity of productivity formation and quality of fruits, taking into account the methods of cultivation. Fruits of apple trees serve as a rich source of pectin substances. The unique soil and climatic conditions of many regions of our republic, contribute to the industrial and amateur cultivation of the fruit crop of the apple tree. In this connection, it became necessary to assess the economic efficiency of various apple varieties and justify their selection for further use in the technological process of intensive horticulture in conditions of Chechnya. To allocate apple-tree varieties with a complex of features having economic and production significance, which consists in determination of influence of variety and rootstock, on terms of entry of trees in the period of fruiting and formation of yield.
